1. Internet Interv. 2022 Aug 24;30:100568. doi: 10.1016/j.invent.2022.100568. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Using smartphone-based ecological momentary assessment and personalized feedback 
for patients with chronic cancer-related fatigue: A proof-of-concept study.

Bootsma TI(1)(2), Schellekens MPJ(1)(3), van Woezik RAM(1), Slatman J(2), van 
der Lee ML(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Helen Dowling Institute, Center for Psycho-Oncology, Scientific Research 
Department, Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(2)Tilburg University, School of Humanities and Digital Sciences, Department of 
Culture Studies, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
(3)Tilburg University, School of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Department of 
Medical and Clinical Psychology and Center of Research on Psychological 
disorders and Somatic diseases (CoRPS), Tilburg, the Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic cancer-related fatigue (CCRF) is a complex 
multidimensional problem warranting person-centered care. Providing patients and 
therapists personalized feedback based on network analysis applied to ecological 
momentary assessment (EMA) data could facilitate case conceptualization in 
psycho-oncological care. The aim was to explore patients' and therapists' 
experiences of using an EMA app and personalized feedback based on network 
theory to aid case conceptualization in psycho-oncological care.
METHODS: A n = 5 proof-of-concept study was implemented in routine 
psycho-oncological care. We purposively selected adult cancer patients suffering 
from severe CCRF who were on the waitlist for psycho-oncological care. During a 
3-week period participants filled out the EMA app Energy InSight (fatigue, mood, 
activity, responding, and context) five times a day. Participants received a 
descriptive and network feedback report, which they reflected upon during the 
first therapy sessions. Thematic analysis was used to analyze user experiences.
RESULTS: Patients experienced that filling out the Energy InSight app, as well 
as receiving descriptive and network-based personalized feedback provided them 
with insight into their CCRF. Although therapists experienced the discussion of 
network feedback as challenging, it facilitated the case conceptualization.
DISCUSSION: Using EMA during waitlist for psychological care seemed feasible. 
Patients experienced beneficial effects from filling out the EMA app and talking 
over the personalized feedback reports, which in turn aided case 
conceptualization and personalized care. Based on this evaluation, an improved 
version of the Energy InSight app and a therapist training for providing network 
feedback is developed for implementation in psycho-oncological care.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.invent.2022.100568
PMCID: PMC9441302
PMID: 36072334

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


2. Front Psychiatry. 2022 Dec 14;13:1011585. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1011585. 
eCollection 2022.

Reducing craving and lapse risk in alcohol and stimulants dependence using 
mobile app involving ecological momentary assessment and self-guided 
psychological interventions: Protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Obarska K(1)(2), Binkowska AA(1)(3), Marcowski P(1), Szymczak K(1)(4), Lewczuk 
K(1)(5), Sollich K(1), Banaszak M(1)(6), Woronowicz B(1)(7), Nowicka M(1), 
Skorko M(1)(2), Gola M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)PredictWatch, Białystok, Poland.
(2)Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
(3)DrugsTeam, NeuroCognitive Research Center, SWPS University of Social Sciences 
and Humanities, Warsaw, Poland
(4)Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University, Warsaw, Poland
(5)Institute of Psychology, Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University in Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland
(6)Monar Association, Warsaw, Poland
(7)Consulting Center Akmed, Warsaw, Poland

Erratum in
    Front Psychiatry. 2023 Feb 01;14:1146451. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1146451.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of alcohol consumption in Poland is estimated to be 
as high as 80% of the adult population. The use of stimulants is the second most 
common reason for seeking addiction treatment. However, treatment outcomes 
remain unsatisfactory, as 40-85% of individuals who complete various treatment 
programs relapse and fall back into addiction within 2 years following program 
completion.
METHODS: The 13-armed randomized controlled trial aimed to assess the 
effectiveness of a mobile app-based self-guided psychological intervention 
delivered via a smartphone app (Nałogometr) in reducing craving and lapse risk 
in problematic alcohol or stimulants use. Participant recruitment and data 
collection will be performed from June 2022 to September 2022. The 4-week mobile 
intervention program will include short-term and long-term intervention modules 
based mainly on mindfulness and cognitive-behavioral therapy. Intervention 
effectiveness assessment will include Ecological Momentary Assessment. That is, 
we will collect longitudinal data on a set of characteristics of day-to-day 
functioning. The primary outcomes will include a self-reported number of lapses 
and addiction craving level. In contrast, the secondary outcomes will be the 
severity of problematic substance use, anxiety and depression scores, and life 
satisfaction scores.
CONCLUSION: This study will establish how mobile app-based self-guided 
psychological interventions can help reduce craving and lapse risk in alcohol 
and stimulant dependence. If successful, this randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
may provide an innovative, easily available, and cost-effective mHealth approach 
for craving and lapse risk in substance addictions.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: [https://clinicaltrials.gov/], identifier [NCT054 
34429].

Copyright © 2022 Obarska, Binkowska, Marcowski, Szymczak, Lewczuk, Sollich, 
Banaszak, Woronowicz, Nowicka, Skorko and Gola.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1011585
PMCID: PMC9795071
PMID: 36590610

Conflict of interest statement: KO, AB, PM, KSz, KL, KSo, MB, BW, MN, MS, and MG 
were employed by company PredictWatch.


3. J Psychiatr Res. 2016 Apr;75:116-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.01.011. Epub 
2016 Jan 22.

Ecological momentary assessment versus standard assessment instruments for 
measuring mindfulness, depressed mood, and anxiety among older adults.

Moore RC(1), Depp CA(2), Wetherell JL(3), Lenze EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive 0993, La Jolla, CA 92093-0993, USA; The Sam and Rose Stein Institute for 
Research on Aging, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive 0664, 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0664, USA; VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3550 La Jolla 
Village Drive, San Diego, CA 92161, USA. Electronic address: r6moore@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive 0993, La Jolla, CA 92093-0993, USA; The Sam and Rose Stein Institute for 
Research on Aging, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive 0664, 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0664, USA; VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3550 La Jolla 
Village Drive, San Diego, CA 92161, USA. Electronic address: cdepp@ucsd.edu.
(3)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3550 La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego, CA 
92161, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, 9500 
Gilman Drive 0993, La Jolla, CA 92093-0993, USA. Electronic address: 
jwetherell@ucsd.edu.
(4)Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 660 So. 
Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8134, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
lenzee@psychiatry.wustl.edu.

As mobile data capture tools for patient-reported outcomes proliferate in 
clinical research, a key dimension of measure performance is sensitivity to 
change. This study compared performance of patient-reported measures of 
mindfulness, depression, and anxiety symptoms using traditional paper-and-pencil 
forms versus real-time, ambulatory measurement of symptoms via ecological 
momentary assessment (EMA). Sixty-seven emotionally distressed older adults 
completed paper-and-pencil measures of mindfulness, depression, and anxiety 
along with two weeks of identical items reported during ambulatory monitoring 
via EMA before and after participation in a randomized trial of 
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) or a health education intervention. We 
calculated effect sizes for these measures across both measurement approaches 
and estimated the Number-Needed-to-Treat (NNT) in both measurement conditions. 
Study outcomes greatly differed depending on which measurement method was used. 
When EMA was used to measure clinical symptoms, older adults who participated in 
the MBSR intervention had significantly higher mindfulness and significantly 
lower depression and anxiety than participants in the health education 
intervention at post-treatment. However, these significant changes in symptoms 
were not found when outcomes were measured with paper-and-pencil measures. The 
NNT for mindfulness and depression measures administered through EMA were 
approximately 25-50% lower than NNTs derived from paper-and-pencil 
administration. Sensitivity to change in anxiety was similar across 
administration modes. In conclusion, EMA measures of depression and mindfulness 
substantially outperformed paper-and-pencil measures with the same items. The 
additional resources associated with EMA in clinical trials would seem to be 
offset by its greater sensitivity to detect change in key outcome variables.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.01.011
PMCID: PMC4769895
PMID: 26851494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Sci Rep. 2023 Feb 18;13(1):2873. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-29854-9.

Ecological momentary assessment of mind-wandering: meta-analysis and systematic 
review.

Kawashima I(1), Hinuma T(2), Tanaka SC(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Brain Information Communication Research Laboratory Group, Advanced 
Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan. 
issakuss@gmail.com.
(2)Brain Information Communication Research Laboratory Group, Advanced 
Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Brain Information Communication Research Laboratory Group, Advanced 
Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan. 
xsaori@atr.jp.
(4)Division of Information Science, Graduate School of Science and Technology, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan. xsaori@atr.jp.

Mind-wandering (MW) is a universal human phenomenon and revealing its nature 
contributes to understanding consciousness. The ecological momentary assessment 
(EMA), in which subjects report a momentary mental state, is a suitable method 
to investigate MW in a natural environment. Previous studies employed EMA to 
study MW and attempted to answer the most fundamental question: How often do we 
let our minds wander? However, reported MW occupancies vary widely among 
studies. Further, while some experimental settings may induce bias in MW 
reports, these designs have not been explored. Therefore, we searched PubMed and 
Web of Science for articles published until the end of 2020 and systematically 
reviewed 25 articles, and performed meta-analyses on 17 of them. Our 
meta-analysis found that people spend 34.504% of daily life in mind-wandering, 
and meta-regression revealed that using subject smartphones for EMA, frequent 
sampling, and long experimental duration significantly affect MW reports. This 
result indicates that EMA using subject smartphones may tend to collect sampling 
under habitual smartphone use. Furthermore, these results indicate the existence 
of reactivity, even in MW research. We provide fundamental knowledge of MW and 
discuss rough standards for EMA settings in future MW studies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-29854-9
PMCID: PMC9938857
PMID: 36801931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


5. PLoS One. 2023 Sep 13;18(9):e0291168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0291168. 
eCollection 2023.

The mechanism and effectiveness of mindfulness-based intervention for reducing 
the psychological distress of parents of children with autism spectrum disorder: 
A protocol of randomized control trial of ecological momentary intervention and 
assessment.

Wang Q(1), Ng SM(2), Zhou X(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Graduate Studies, Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Social Work and Social Administration, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: Existing studies have unequivocally demonstrated that parents of 
children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) experience various stressful daily 
life events and suffer from psychological distress. Mindfulness level is found 
to be an effective buffer between parents' appraisal of stress life events and 
psychological distress. However, the mechanism behind the function of 
mindfulness is unclear, and traditional mindfulness-based intervention (MBI) in 
experimental settings is not tailored to personal real-life needs. This study 
proposes to conduct a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to examine the 
effectiveness of MBI delivered by ecological momentary intervention (EMI) and 
assessed by ecological momentary assessment (EMA) in changing participants' 
cognitive appraisal of stressful life events and thus reducing the psychological 
distress of parents of children with ASD.
METHOD: The proposed study will recruit 670 parents of children with ASD and 
randomly assign them to the intervention and control groups (335 in each group). 
Participants in the intervention group will install the EMI/A app on their 
smartphones. In the app, participants can receive practice prompts daily, browse 
and practice different mindfulness exercises in the intervention library at any 
time, talk to a virtual counselor (chatbot) when feeling stressed, complete EMA 
on the cognitive appraisal of life events, and receive the log of change of 
psychological status daily. Participants in the control group will only receive 
audio-based standardized mindfulness practice instructions three times per week. 
The effects of MBI will be assessed based on the EMA data, right after the 
intervention and at the 2-month follow-up. The primary outcome will be 
participants' psychological distress measured by the depression anxiety stress 
scale. The secondary outcomes will include participants' subjective well-being, 
measured by the satisfaction with life scale, and level of resilience, measured 
by the psychological empowerment scale. Multilevel structural equational 
modelling will be applied to examine the pathways of the relationship between 
daily life events, cognitive appraisal, and psychological distress.
DISCUSSION: The potential benefit of the proposed study is to increase the 
psychological well-being of parents of children with ASD, and the method may 
extend to participants suffering from other psychological issues in the future. 
Trial registration: This trial has been registered on clinicaltrials.gov with 
the ID of NCT05746468.

Copyright: © 2023 Wang et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0291168
PMCID: PMC10499232
PMID: 37703248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


6. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2020 Mar;27(2):193-202. doi: 10.1002/cpp.2418. Epub 
2020 Jan 13.

Comparing effects of detached mindfulness and cognitive restructuring in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder using ecological momentary assessment.

Rupp C(1)(2), Gühne D(3), Falke C(1)(2), Doebler P(3), Andor F(2), Buhlmann 
U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Westfälische Wilhelms-University Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(2)Christoph-Dornier-Stiftung, Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany.

Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) has been shown to be a valid and sensitive 
measure of treatment effects in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). As part of 
a clinical trial, this EMA study deals with a comparison of two treatment 
conditions, that is, cognitive restructuring (CR) and detached mindfulness (DM). 
EMA data from n = 39 OCD patients were available from a randomized clinical 
trial on the effectiveness of CR and DM. Smartphone-based EMA sampling spread 
over 4 days each before and after treatment, with 10 random prompts per day and 
a 2-week intervention of either CR or DM. We tracked CR strategies (e.g., 
questioning an appraisal by re-evaluating risk), DM strategies (e.g., allowing 
one's thoughts to come and go), and application of newly learned strategies 
during Post-Treatment EMA. Although there was a trend towards DM strategies 
being applied more often during Pre-Treatment EMA than CR strategies, we did not 
find differences during Post-Treatment EMA between CR and DM regarding frequency 
or difficulty of application and experienced relief. As expected, we found a 
clear pre-post increase for all CR and DM behaviours except for one DM item. 
However, we did not find a treatment-specific increase of CR and DM behaviours; 
that is, both interventions equally well promoted a seemingly general treatment 
effect. Despite the ecological validity of EMA, however, social desirability 
effects cannot be ruled out, so that this conclusion must be handled cautiously. 
Further research is needed to replicate and generalize our results.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cpp.2418
PMID: 31881096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. JMIR Ment Health. 2019 Jan 8;6(1):e10844. doi: 10.2196/10844.

Effects of a Mindfulness Meditation App on Subjective Well-Being: Active 
Randomized Controlled Trial and Experience Sampling Study.

Walsh KM(1), Saab BJ(2)(3)(4)(5), Farb NA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Clinical Science, University of Toronto 
Scarborough, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Mobio Interactive Inc, Biomedical Zone, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Preclinical Laboratory for Translational Research into Affective Disorders, 
Psychiatric Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric 
Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Mindfulness training (MT) includes a variety of contemplative 
practices aimed at promoting intentional awareness of experience, coupled with 
attitudes of nonjudgment and curiosity. Following the success of 8-week, 
manualized group interventions, MT has been implemented in a variety of 
modalities, including smartphone apps that seek to replicate the success of 
group interventions. However, although smartphone apps are scalable and 
accessible to a wider swath of population, their benefits remain largely 
untested.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate a newly developed MT app called 
Wildflowers, which was codeveloped with the laboratory for use in mindfulness 
research. It was hypothesized that 3 weeks of MT through this app would improve 
subjective well-being, attentional control, and interoceptive integration, 
albeit with weaker effects than those published in the 8 week, manualized group 
intervention literature.
METHODS: Undergraduate students completed 3 weeks of MT with Wildflowers (n=45) 
or 3 weeks of cognitive training with a game called 2048 (n=41). State training 
effects were assessed through pre- and postsession ratings of current mood, 
stress level, and heart rate. Trait training effects were assessed through pre- 
and postintervention questionnaires canvassing subjective well-being and 
behavioral task measures of attentional control and interoceptive integration. 
State and trait training data were analyzed in a multilevel model using emergent 
latent factors (acceptance, awareness, and openness) to summarize the trait 
questionnaire battery.
RESULTS: Analyses revealed both state and trait effects specific to MT; 
participants engaging in MT demonstrated improved mood (r=.14) and a reduction 
of stress (r=-.13) immediately after each training session compared with before 
the training session and decreased postsession stress over 3 weeks (r=-.08). In 
addition, MT relative to cognitive training resulted in greater improvements in 
attentional control (r=-.24). Interestingly, both groups demonstrated increased 
subjective ratings of awareness (r=.28) and acceptance (r=.23) from pre- to 
postintervention, with greater changes in acceptance for the MT group trending 
(r=.21).
CONCLUSIONS: MT, using a smartphone app, may provide immediate effects on mood 
and stress while also providing long-term benefits for attentional control. 
Although further investigation is warranted, there is evidence that with 
continued usage, MT via a smartphone app may provide long-term benefits in 
changing how one relates to their inner and outer experiences.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: 
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03783793; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03783793 (Archived 
by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/75EF2ehst).

©Kathleen Marie Walsh, Bechara J Saab, Norman AS Farb. Originally published in 
JMIR Mental Health (http://mental.jmir.org), 08.01.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/10844
PMCID: PMC6329416
PMID: 30622094

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: BJS is the Chief 
Scientist and CEO of Mobio Interactive Inc, and he owned approximately 40% of 
the company at the time of manuscript acceptance. BJS exclusively served as a 
technical liaison for the study and did not contribute to study design, did not 
contribute to selecting the active control, or the primary surveys, nor did he 
directly contribute to, or have influence over, data collection or analysis. 
NASF is a scientific advisor and mindfulness guide for Mobio Interactive Inc, 
and he owned approximately 2% of the company at the time of manuscript 
acceptance. NASF was involved in all aspects of study design and data analysis, 
but did not directly contribute to, or have influence over, data collection; nor 
did he directly perform any of the analyses. No other authors have connections 
to Mobio Interactive Inc. None of the authors in this study received financial 
compensation or any other form of compensation for the research undertaken 
herein. Mobio Interactive Inc did, however, contribute Can $5000 to the Ontario 
Centre of Excellence research grant that, in part, funded this study, as 
mandated by the funding agency.


8. JMIR Ment Health. 2025 Sep 30;12:e79296. doi: 10.2196/79296.

Smartphone-Based Mindfulness and Mentalization Ecological Momentary 
Interventions for Common Mental Health Problems: Pilot Randomized Controlled 
Trial.

O'Driscoll C(1), O'Reilly S(1), Jaremba AJ(1), Nolte T(1)(2), Shaikh M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and Health Psychology, 
University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom, 44 
2076791991.
(2)Anna Freud Centre, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Clinical Health Psychology, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, Rainham, 
United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Accessible ecological momentary interventions deliver brief, 
real-time support integrated into daily routines. Interpersonal dynamics and 
maladaptive coping mechanisms can contribute to an individual's anxiety and 
depression. Both mindfulness and mentalization represent psychological 
constructs with the potential to mitigate the negative impact of interpersonal 
stressors.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to assess the feasibility and acceptability of an 
automated mindfulness- and mentalization-based ecological momentary intervention 
for common mental health problems as delivered via a mobile phone app.
METHODS: The design was a parallel-group pilot randomized controlled trial with 
1:1 allocation ratio and exploratory framework. Recruitment of participants 
experiencing common mental health issues was internet-based from a university 
setting. Eligible participants were randomly allocated to fully automated 
mindfulness- or mentalization-based ecological momentary interventions via 
computer-generated randomization. Participants were blind to the alternative 
intervention options. Outcomes were self-assessed through questionnaires after 4 
weeks. Primary outcomes were feasibility (recruitment, retention, and adherence) 
and acceptability (satisfaction ratings and qualitative feedback). Secondary 
outcomes included changes in depression (Patient Health Questionnaire-9 [PHQ-9]) 
and anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire-7 [GAD-7]) scores.
RESULTS: A total of 84 participants were randomized (42 to each group). The 
interventions demonstrated good feasibility with an 89.2% retention rate and a 
mean adherence of 87.69% (SD 11.3%) across both groups. Acceptability ratings 
were positive, with favorable scores for ease of engagement (mean 5.20, SD 1.6), 
overall enjoyment (mean 5.15, SD 1.2), and likelihood of recommending the app 
(mean 5.11, SD 1.6) on a 7-point scale. For primary outcomes, both groups showed 
significant within-group reductions in PHQ-9 and GAD-7 scores, with moderate to 
large effect sizes (Cohen d=-0.68 to -0.81), with no significant difference 
between groups. Both treatments demonstrated clinically significant change, with 
33 (44%) participants in both groups no longer meeting caseness criteria for 
anxiety and depression. Mindfulness performed better on improving assertiveness 
and perceived support compared to mentalization in the ecological momentary 
assessment data. One unintended harm was reported in the mindfulness arm, 
whereas none was reported in the mentalization arm.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot trial suggests that both mindfulness- and 
mentalization-based ecological momentary interventions are feasible and 
acceptable for individuals with common mental health problems and warrant 
further evaluation.

© Ciarán O'Driscoll, Sarah O'Reilly, Agata Julita Jaremba, Tobias Nolte, Madiha 
Shaikh. Originally published in JMIR Mental Health (https://mental.jmir.org).

DOI: 10.2196/79296
PMCID: PMC12483342
PMID: 41027022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


9. Ann Behav Med. 2025 Jan 4;59(1):kaaf025. doi: 10.1093/abm/kaaf025.

App-based mindfulness meditation reduces stress in novice meditators: a 
randomized controlled trial of headspace using ecological momentary assessment.

Zawadzki MJ(1)(2), Torok ZA(1)(2), Peña M(1)(2), Gavrilova L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of California, Merced, CA 
95353, United States.
(2)Health Sciences Research Institute, University of California, Merced, CA 
95343, United States.

BACKGROUND: App-based mindfulness meditation programs have shown mixed effects 
in reducing stress levels. These studies have typically relied on limited 
assessments of dimensions of stress and on pre-post designs to detect effects.
PURPOSE: This randomized controlled trial examined the effect of the mindfulness 
meditation app Headspace on reducing subjective stress, stressor appraisals, 
perceived coping, and perseverative cognitions. It tested stress-reducing 
effects in everyday life throughout an eight-week intervention period.
METHOD: Non-faculty employees (n = 138; age M = 38.19; 75.36% female; 54.5% 
White, 27.54% Hispanic; 51.45% with a professional degree) from a university in 
California's Central Valley were randomized into either the Headspace condition 
(instructed to complete 10 minutes of meditation daily) or wait-list (inactive) 
control group. Participants completed ecological momentary assessments of stress 
five times a day for four consecutive days at baseline, at two and five weeks 
after randomization (mid-intervention), and at eight weeks post-randomization 
(post-intervention), resulting in 6260 observations of stress dimensions.
RESULTS: Hierarchical linear models were used to test the interaction of 
condition by time, revealing significant effects for subjective stress, 
perceived coping, and perseverative cognitions. By week 2, compared to the 
baseline, participants in the Headspace condition reported less subjective 
stress and perseverative cognitions, and by week 5 reported more perceived 
coping. These effects persisted through week 8. No changes were observed for 
stressor appraisal. Participants in the control condition reported increases in 
subjective stress and perseverative cognitions, and decreases in coping, 
throughout the intervention period.
DISCUSSION: Headspace was effective at reducing stress in a high-stress 
environment. Findings suggest the potential for relatively quick and sustained 
gains in stress benefits from meditation practice that may help practitioners 
develop their future programs.

Plain Language Summary: This study tested the effectiveness of the mindfulness 
meditation app Headspace to reduce stress among new meditators. Non-faculty 
university employees were randomly assigned to either a Headspace meditation 
group or a control group. Participants in the meditation group were asked to 
meditate for 10 minutes daily over an 8-week period. To track changes in stress, 
ecological momentary assessments were used, which measure stress throughout the 
day to give an understanding of stress in real time while people go about their 
daily lives. Different aspects of stress were measured, including feelings of 
stress, how negative stressful events were perceived, how much a participant 
felt they could cope, and stressful thinking. These measures were taken at the 
beginning of the study, and then two, five, and eight weeks after participants 
started meditating. The results showed that participants in the Headspace group 
experienced a significant reduction in feeling stressed and stressful thinking, 
and they reported improved coping, both during and at the end of the eight-week 
study. In contrast, participants in the control group reported the opposite 
pattern, indicating an increase in stress. Overall, the study suggests that 
brief, daily mindfulness practice using an app like Headspace can effectively 
reduce stress in everyday life.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Behavioral Medicine.

DOI: 10.1093/abm/kaaf025
PMCID: PMC12010245
PMID: 40257119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have conflicts of interest to 
declare.


10. Health Psychol. 2021 Sep;40(9):578-586. doi: 10.1037/hea0001105. Epub 2021 Sep 
27.

Awareness, affect, and craving during smoking cessation: An experience sampling 
study.

Sala M(1), Roos CR(2), Brewer JA(2), Garrison KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology.
(2)Department of Psychiatry.

OBJECTIVE: Mindfulness has received attention in smoking cessation research, yet 
the mechanisms by which mindfulness may promote smoking cessation are not well 
understood. Mindfulness training may help individuals increase awareness and 
respond skillfully to processes that contribute to smoking, such as affective 
states and craving. This study used experience sampling (ES) to test how 
awareness was related to craving, positive and negative affect and smoking, in 
the moment, among smokers in treatment for smoking cessation.
METHOD: Participants (N = 228) were part of a clinical trial evaluating Craving 
to Quit, a smartphone app for mindfulness training for smoking cessation, 
compared to an app delivering only ES. All participants were asked to complete 
22 days of ES, with up to 6 ES surveys per day, measuring awareness, craving, 
positive and negative affect and smoking. Data were analyzed using multilevel 
linear modeling.
RESULTS: Both at the within and between-person level, higher awareness was 
associated with higher positive affect, lower craving and lower negative affect. 
Lower within-person craving was associated with lower smoking. Within-person 
awareness, positive and negative affect were not significantly associated with 
smoking. At the between-person level, higher awareness and higher positive 
affect, and lower negative affect and lower craving were associated with lower 
smoking.
CONCLUSIONS: Awareness of current experience was related to key psychological 
variables linked to behavior change in smoking cessation, namely positive and 
negative affect and craving, among smokers trying to quit. Future studies should 
test whether learning to increase awareness, such as through mindfulness 
training, may benefit smokers in treatment. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 
APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/hea0001105
PMCID: PMC8629854
PMID: 34570534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Dr. Brewer is the founder 
of MindSciences, the company that developed the mindfulness app used in this 
study. He owns stock in, serves as a non-compensated scientist for the company 
and has previously served on the board of directors. This financial interest has 
been disclosed to and is being managed by Brown University, in accordance with 
its Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment policies. All other authors 
report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


11. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Feb 1;14:1146451. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1146451. 
eCollection 2023.

Corrigendum: Reducing craving and lapse risk in alcohol and stimulants 
dependence using mobile app involving ecological momentary assessment and 
self-guided psychological interventions: Protocol for a randomized controlled 
trial.

Obarska K(1)(2), Binkowska AA(1)(3), Marcowski P(1), Szymczak K(1)(4), Lewczuk 
K(1)(5), Sollich K(1), Banaszak M(1)(6), Woronowicz B(1)(7), Nowicka M(1), 
Skorko M(1)(2), Gola M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)PredictWatch, Białystok, Poland.
(2)Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)DrugsTeam, NeuroCognitive Research Center, SWPS University of Social Sciences 
and Humanities, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Psychology, Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University in Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Monar Association, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Consulting Center Akmed, Warsaw, Poland.

Erratum for
    Front Psychiatry. 2022 Dec 14;13:1011585. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1011585.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1011585.].

Copyright © 2023 Obarska, Binkowska, Marcowski, Szymczak, Lewczuk, Sollich, 
Banaszak, Woronowicz, Nowicka, Skorko and Gola.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1146451
PMCID: PMC9929949
PMID: 36816420


12. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2019 Nov;26(6):695-706. doi: 10.1002/cpp.2392. Epub 
2019 Aug 14.

A study on treatment sensitivity of ecological momentary assessment in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Rupp C(1)(2), Falke C(1)(2), Gühne D(3), Doebler P(3), Andor F(2), Buhlmann 
U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Westfälische Wilhelms-University Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(2)Christoph-Dornier-Stiftung, Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany.

As part of a larger clinical trial, this ecological momentary assessment (EMA) 
study pursued the main goal of demonstrating that the EMA method is sensitive to 
treatment effects of detached mindfulness and cognitive restructuring for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). A second goal was to provide a descriptive 
analysis of OCD symptoms and influencing factors in participants' everyday 
lives. Thirty-nine participants were included in the final analyses. EMA 
sampling involved a smartphone and comprised 4 days with 10 random prompts per 
day both before (Pre-Treatment EMA) and after the completion of a 2-week 
clinical intervention of either detached mindfulness or cognitive restructuring 
(Post-Treatment EMA) that participants had been randomly allocated to. The EMA 
questionnaire included items on the frequency of obsessions, subjective burden 
due to obsessions, perceived current stress, emotions, and on the frequency of 
compulsions and other dysfunctional behaviors. Descriptive Pre-Treatment EMA 
results highlight the importance of compulsions and emotional states of 
tension/discomfort in OCD. Pre-Post comparisons showed a significant reduction 
of avoidance behavior, obsessions, and burden due to obsessions, with a 
nonsignificant trend also indicating a reduction of compulsions. There was no 
pre to post effect concerning emotions. This study adds to the existing research 
on OCD symptoms and offers further evidence in confirmation of established 
theoretical models of OCD. Also, our results can be taken as evidence for 
treatment sensitivity of the EMA method in OCD. Further research is needed to 
replicate, broaden, and generalize our results.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cpp.2392
PMID: 31365952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mindfulness (N Y). 2022 Sep;13(9):2324-2336. doi: 10.1007/s12671-022-01961-0. 
Epub 2022 Aug 22.

Testing the Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory in Daily Life.

Sgherza TR(1), DeMarree KG(2), Naragon-Gainey K(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(2)University at Buffalo, the State University of New York, Buffalo, New York, 
United States of America.

OBJECTIVES: The Mindfulness-to-Meaning Theory (MMT) describes the processes 
through which mindfulness leads to enhanced eudaimonic wellbeing (indirectly via 
mediating processes such as increased decentering, reappraisal, positive affect, 
and savoring), but little is currently known about how these processes impact 
one another over short time periods (e.g., across several hours). The current 
study tested the MMT by measuring these variables repeatedly as they occur 
naturalistically in daily life.
METHOD: Three hundred and forty-five community members aged 18-65 completed 
surveys on smartphones six times per day over seven days, assessing their 
current levels of decentering, reappraisal, positive affect, savoring, and 
wellbeing, as part of a larger study. Multilevel structural equation modeling in 
Mplus was used to analyze the nested data with mediation models.
RESULTS: There was a significant indirect effect through the proposed MMT 
pathway at the within-person level, with all variables measured concurrently. 
Lagged mediation examining prospective effects indicated that the full indirect 
MMT pathway was not significant in predicting later wellbeing, though some 
individual indirect pathways were significant prospectively. Follow-up analyses 
testing alternative temporal ordering suggested bidirectional effects of 
savoring and positive affect in explaining the mutual association between 
decentering and wellbeing.
CONCLUSION: Overall, this study found support for hypothesized MMT processes in 
daily life and measured over short time periods, with evidence for bidirectional 
effects for some processes. However, reappraisal showed inconsistent effects, 
requiring further study and replication using ecological momentary assessment 
designs.

DOI: 10.1007/s12671-022-01961-0
PMCID: PMC10305795
PMID: 37384216

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations The authors declare that they have 
no conflict of interest. This study was approved by the Institutional Review 
Board at the University at Buffalo and has been performed in accordance with 
ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants.


14. J Anxiety Disord. 2024 Jun;104:102858. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2024.102858. Epub 
2024 Mar 24.

Is a brief mindfulness ecological momentary intervention more efficacious than a 
self-monitoring app for social anxiety disorder? A randomized controlled trial.

Zainal NH(1), Tan HH(2), Hong RY(2), Newman MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School (HMS), Department of Health Care Policy, USA; National 
University of Singapore (NUS), Department of Psychology, USA. Electronic 
address: nhzainal@hcp.med.harvard.edu.
(2)National University of Singapore (NUS), Department of Psychology, USA.
(3)The Pennsylvania State University (PSU), Department of Psychology, USA.

Despite their proliferation, limited knowledge exists regarding possible 
benefits of brief mindfulness ecological momentary interventions (MEMIs) for 
social anxiety disorder (SAD). Propositions that MEMIs could alleviate SAD 
symptoms and related clinical outcomes remain untested. This trial evaluated a 
14-day MEMI for SAD. Participants with self-reported SAD were randomized to MEMI 
(n = 96) or self-monitoring app (SM; n = 95). Whereas MEMI instructed 
mindfulness exercises, SM prompted only self-monitoring five times daily for 14 
days. Participants completed state-level self-reports of depression, anxiety, 
and mindfulness pre-post-mindfulness practice and SAD symptoms, worry, 
depression severity, repetitive negative thinking, and trait mindfulness at 
pre-randomization, post-intervention, and 1-month follow-up (1MFU). Hierarchical 
linear modeling was conducted. The MEMI yielded statistically significantly 
larger improvements in momentary depression, anxiety, and mindfulness (Cohen's d 
= -0.10-0.11). Although no between-group effects emerged in alleviating SAD fear 
and avoidance, excessive worry, depression severity, repetitive negative 
thinking, and trait mindfulness (-0.13-0.15), within-group effects were 
significantly small-to-large from pre-post and pre-1MFU (-4.62-0.67). A 
significant reduction in depression severity occurred in MEMI (-0.63--0.60) but 
not SM (-0.31--0.29). Brief MEMI and SM yielded nondifferent sustained effects 
on SAD, comorbid symptoms, and risk factors, highlighting its potential value 
within stepped-care delivery settings.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2024.102858
PMCID: PMC11411489
PMID: 38657408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest My research 
team and I have no conflicts of interest to declare.


15. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Aug 12:2025.08.08.25333320. doi: 
10.1101/2025.08.08.25333320.

Ecological momentary assessment and mediation analyses reveal relationships 
between affect, craving, and substance use in daily life.

Baillet E(1), Harp NR(1), Kober H(1), Roos C(2).

Author information:
(1)University of California, Berkeley.
(2)Yale University.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Craving, the desire to use substances, is a key factor and 
diagnostic criterion for substance use disorders (SUDs) that predicts substance 
use. Experiencing affective states, both positive (PA) and negative (NA), are 
also implicated in SUDs. Yet, the interrelationships among affect, craving, and 
substance use remain unclear, particularly at the within-person level of 
analysis. This study aimed to use ecological momentary assessment (EMA) to test 
whether craving mediates the association between PA/NA and subsequent substance 
use.
DESIGN: Observational study using EMA over a 14-day period and multilevel 
mediation models with bootstrapping.
SETTING: Outpatient addiction treatment centers in which participants were 
enrolled during the data collection period.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults with SUDs enrolled in a pilot randomized controlled trial, 
evaluating an app-delivered mindfulness-based intervention for SUDs, that 
completed the baseline EMA period and were also randomized to a treatment 
condition (N=36).
MEASUREMENTS: Participants completed EMA surveys three times daily [midday, 
afternoon, evening] for 14 days, reporting on current PA, NA, craving, and 
substance use. We used multilevel mediation modeling to test within-person 
associations and examine whether craving mediated the link between affect (PA 
and NA) and subsequent substance use.
FINDINGS: Mediation analysis showed an indirect pathway via craving on the link 
between affect and substance use. Higher PA was associated with lower craving at 
the same EMA survey, which in turn led to reduced likelihood of substance use at 
the next survey (β=-0.04, p=0.02). Conversely, higher NA was associated with 
higher craving at the same survey, leading to greater likelihood of substance 
use at the next survey (β=0.08, p=0.03).
CONCLUSION: At the within-person level, craving mediates the association between 
affective states and subsequent substance use in individuals with SUD. PA 
predicted lower craving, which in turn predicted lower likelihood of substance 
use, while NA predicted higher craving, which in turn predicted greater 
likelihood of substance use. Our findings suggest that a promising strategy may 
be targeting momentary affect in daily life, such as through ecological 
momentary interventions.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.08.08.25333320
PMCID: PMC12363714
PMID: 40832373

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of competing interest: None.


16. Psychol Aging. 2021 Aug;36(5):642-659. doi: 10.1037/pag0000596. Epub 2021 Feb 
25.

State mindfulness and affective well-being in the daily lives of middle-aged and 
older adults.

Mahlo L(1), Windsor TD(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Education, Psychology and Social Work.

Contemporary conceptualizations of mindfulness refer to paying attention to the 
present moment with an open and nonjudgmental attitude. Empirical research is 
increasingly focusing on mindfulness as a dynamic and multifaceted state that 
can fluctuate across situations and time. The present study aimed to extend 
existing knowledge by using experience-sampling methodology to examine 
state-level mindfulness, pleasant/unpleasant event occurrence, and affective 
well-being in the everyday lives of middle-aged and older adults. A 
community-based sample of 157 participants aged 53-86 (M = 69.36, SD = 5.80) was 
recruited in May-June 2020. Participants completed assessments of 
multidimensional state mindfulness, hassle and uplift occurrence, and positive 
and negative affect on their smartphones, four times a day over 10 consecutive 
days. (Total observations: 4,761; M = 30.32, SD = 8.78.) Multilevel models 
indicated that the state mindfulness-facets present-moment attention and 
nonjudgmental acceptance were predictive of greater affective well-being in 
older adulthood. Furthermore, nonjudgmental acceptance appeared to buffer 
affective reactivity to daily hassles, and importantly, this effect was stronger 
at older ages. Mindful states did not appear to provide any further boost to 
uplift-related mood. The findings suggest that occasions characterized by 
relatively high present-moment attention and nonjudgmental acceptance may 
contribute to enhanced emotional well-being in later adulthood. Furthermore, 
adopting a nonevaluative and accepting orientation toward momentary experiences 
may be a psychological strategy that has particular utility for mitigating 
emotional reactivity to daily stressors with increasing age. Future research 
should investigate multidimensional state mindfulness and affective well-being 
for middle-aged and older adults participating in mindfulness-based 
interventions. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/pag0000596
PMID: 33630632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2025 Mar 19;13:e55379. doi: 10.2196/55379.

Proximal Effects of a Just-in-Time Adaptive Intervention for Smoking Cessation 
With Wearable Sensors: Microrandomized Trial.

Vinci C(1), Sutton SK(1), Yang MJ(1), Jones SR(1), Kumar S(2), Wetter DW(3).

Author information:
(1)Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, United States.
(2)University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States.
(3)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco use remains the leading preventable cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the United States. Novel interventions are needed to improve 
smoking cessation rates. Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) for cessation 
address tobacco use by increasing awareness of the automatic nature of smoking 
and related behaviors (eg, reactivity to triggers for smoking) from a 
nonjudgmental stance. Delivering MBIs for smoking cessation via innovative 
technologies allows for flexibility in the timing of intervention delivery, 
which has the potential to improve the efficacy of cessation interventions. 
Research shows MBIs target key mechanisms in the smoking cessation process and 
can be used to minimize drivers of smoking lapse.
OBJECTIVE: This single-arm study investigated the impact of mindfulness-based 
strategies and motivational messages on proximal outcomes, collected via 
ecological momentary assessment (EMA), relevant to tobacco abstinence via a 
microrandomized trial. This approach allows for the evaluation of intervention 
content on proximal outcomes (eg, reduced negative affect) that are thought to 
impact positive distal outcomes (eg, smoking abstinence).
METHODS: All participants were motivated to quit smoking, and the intervention 
they received included nicotine replacement therapy, brief individual 
counseling, and a 2-week Just-in-Time Adaptive Intervention (JITAI) with 
wearable sensors. Throughout the JITAI period, a single strategy was randomly 
pushed (vs not) multiple times per day through the smartphone application. An 
EMA next assessed negative affect, positive affect, mindfulness, abstinence 
self-efficacy, motivation to quit, craving, and smoking motives. The primary 
analyses evaluated differences in EMA outcomes (proximal) for when a strategy 
was pushed versus not pushed. Additional analyses evaluated changes in similar 
outcomes collected from surveys at the baseline and end-of-treatment visits.
RESULTS: Participants (N=38) were 63% (24/38) female, 18% (7/38) Hispanic or 
Latino, and 29% (11/38) African American. They had an average age of 49 years 
and smoked an average of 15 (SD 7.9) cigarettes per day. Results indicated that 
receiving the JITAI significantly reduced proximal negative affect in the second 
(and final) week of the intervention. Self-reports provided at baseline and end 
of treatment showed significant decreases in perceived stress, automaticity of 
smoking and craving, and a significant increase in abstinence self-efficacy. 
Increases in abstinence self-efficacy significantly predicted abstinence.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first study to test the proximal 
impact of a mindfulness-based JITAI on key variables associated with smoking 
cessation. Our primary finding was that negative affect was lower following the 
completion of a strategy (vs when no strategy was delivered) in the final week 
of the JITAI. Among a larger sample size, future research should extend the 
length of the intervention to further evaluate the impact of the JITAI, as well 
as include a comparison condition to further evaluate how each component of the 
intervention uniquely impacts outcomes.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03404596; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03404596.

©Christine Vinci, Steve K Sutton, Min-Jeong Yang, Sarah R Jones, Santosh Kumar, 
David W Wetter. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth 
(https://mhealth.jmir.org), 19.03.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/55379
PMCID: PMC11966069
PMID: 40106803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: SK has financial 
interests in CuesHub, and PBC, including stock ownership and management role.


18. Contemp Clin Trials Commun. 2023 Aug 6;36:101180. doi: 
10.1016/j.conctc.2023.101180. eCollection 2023 Dec.

Evaluating the effectiveness of mobile app-based self-guided psychological 
intervention to reduce craving and lapse risk in problematic substance use and 
behaviors: Protocol for a randomized control trial in the general population.

Binkowska AA(1)(2), Obarska K(1)(3), Marcowski P(1), Szymczak K(1)(4), Lewczuk 
K(1)(5), Sollich K(1), Banaszak M(1)(6), Woronowicz B(1)(7), Nowicka M(1), 
Skorko M(1)(3), Gola M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)PredictWatch, Upalna 1A/76, 15-668, Białystok, Poland.
(2)DrugsTeam, NeuroCognitive Research Center, SWPS University of Social Sciences 
and Humanities, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Psychology, Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University in Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Monar Association, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Consulting Center Akmed, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of substance and behavioral addiction is estimated 
between 10 and 15% of the global population and remains a severe public health 
concern. Moreover, addiction treatment has several barriers, such as a lack of 
access to professional treatment or stigmatization. Mobile health interventions 
emerge as a promising solution.
METHODS: This two-armed randomized controlled trial (RCT) aims to assess the 
efficacy of a mobile app-based self-guided psychological intervention delivered 
via a smartphone app (Nałogometr) in reducing craving and lapse risk in 
problematic behaviors and substance use compared to a control condition. 
Participant recruitment and data collection will start in June 2022 and end in 
September 2022. Due to the nature of the study, i.e., a nationwide study of 
problematic substance use and behaviors, we will aim to recruit all individuals 
willing to participate. The four-week intervention condition includes short-term 
and long-term modules based mainly on mindfulness and cognitive behavioral 
therapy. Longitudinal data on several variables related to craving and lapse 
risk are collected daily using ecological momentary assessment (EMA). The 
primary outcomes of interest will be the self-reported number of lapses and 
craving level in daily EMA. Moreover, a questionnaire battery assessment is 
administered at baseline in the first week following onboarding, after five 
weeks, and after six months. The secondary outcome measures will include the 
severity of problematic substance use or behaviors, anxiety and depression, and 
life satisfaction.
RESULTS: Results will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: [https://clinicaltrials.gov/], identifier [NCT054 
34,429].

© 2023 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conctc.2023.101180
PMCID: PMC10500479
PMID: 37720591

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests.


19. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2022 Sep;90(9):655-669. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000763.

Which adolescents are well-suited to app-based mindfulness training? A 
randomized clinical trial and data-driven approach for personalized 
recommendations.

Webb CA(1), Swords CM(2), Lawrence HR(1), Hilt LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School.
(2)Department of Psychology, Lawrence University.

OBJECTIVE: Rumination heightens risk for depression and anxiety, which increase 
substantially during adolescence. Smartphone apps offer a convenient and 
cost-effective means for adolescents to access mindfulness training, which may 
reduce rumination. Despite their increasing popularity, it is unclear which 
adolescents benefit from mindfulness apps.
METHOD: Adolescents (n = 152) with elevated trait rumination were randomly 
assigned to 3 weeks of app-based mindfulness training or a mood-monitoring 
control. Multilevel models tested group differences in state rumination change, 
assessed via ecological momentary assessment. Baseline adolescent 
characteristics were submitted to elastic net regularization models to develop a 
"Personalized Advantage Index" indicating an individual's expected outcome from 
the mindfulness app relative to the mood-monitoring control. Finally, we 
translated a predictive model (developed in an external sample) for personalized 
recommendations of expected benefit from the mindfulness app.
RESULTS: Adolescents in the mindfulness app condition reported significantly 
greater reductions in rumination than adolescents in the control condition. 
Individuals predicted to have better outcomes from the mindfulness app relative 
to mood monitoring had significantly greater reductions in rumination if 
randomly assigned to the mindfulness condition. In contrast, between-condition 
differences in outcome were not significant for adolescents predicted to have 
better outcomes in the mood-monitoring condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings support the efficacy of a mindfulness app to reduce state 
rumination in adolescents, particularly among adolescents high in trait 
rumination. A predictive model is put forth, which could be used to objectively 
communicate expected mindfulness app outcomes to adolescents prior to engagement 
in app-based mindfulness training. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2022 APA, all 
rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/ccp0000763
PMCID: PMC9886135
PMID: 36279218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


20. PLoS One. 2024 Oct 24;19(10):e0307690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307690. 
eCollection 2024.

Mind your pain: A single-arm feasibility study to assess a smartphone-based 
interoceptive attention training for patients with chronic low back pain.

Mehling WE(1), Strigo IA(2)(3), Goldman V(4), Hartogensis W(4), Adler SR(1), 
Lotz J(5), Hecht FM(6).

Author information:
(1)Osher Center for Integrative Health & Department of Family and Community 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(3)Emotion & Pain Laboratory, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San 
Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Osher Center for Integrative Health, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(6)Osher Center for Integrative Health & Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: People commonly cope with chronic low back pain (cLBP) by ignoring 
and distraction. Can mindful interoceptive exposure to the pain sensation itself 
and its phenomenological components be an alternative approach?
METHODS: Single-arm feasibility study in patients with cLBP using a 2-minute 
attention exercise guided by a smartphone app several times per day over 8 
weeks. We assessed feasibility, pre/post pain, function, and psychological 
parameters using mixed methods: standard questionnaires, ecological momentary 
assessment, and exit interviews that included micro-phenomenology technique and 
subsequent reflexive thematic qualitative analysis.
RESULTS: We enrolled 31 participants, mostly female, mean age 48, the majority 
had pain for >5 years; 29 completed. Mean pain intensity [0-10] improved from 
4.8 ±1.7 to 3.1 ±1.9 (p < .0001); mean PEG scores (intensity and interference 
with daily life; range 0-30) improved from 13.7 ±6.2 to 8.4 ±6.6 (p < .0001); 
pain impact (9 items incl physical function) 22.3 ±8.7 to 19.7 ±8.1 (p = .0010). 
Twenty-one of 29 improved PEG score ≥30%. There were significant improvements in 
PCS Rumination and MAIA Not-Worrying. Participants became aware of their usual 
habit of avoidance and the challenge of and resistance to focusing on pain. They 
were surprised how pain sensations varied over time, and that pain intensity and 
the threat value of pain could diminish by focusing on it. They described a 
variety of 3D pain shapes (e.g., football, pool ball, rod, nail, brick, stars) 
with a range of colors, transparency, temperature, and density that for some 
changed with mindful attention. Most struggled to find appropriate words for 
sensory awareness and attention regulation and found that the threat value of 
their pain diminished.
CONCLUSIONS: Mindful interoceptive exposure to the sensations of their cLBP 
using a 2-minute attention exercise with a phone app-rather than ignoring and 
distracting from it-may be a beneficial intervention for cLBP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov #NCT06186193.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307690
PMCID: PMC11500934
PMID: 39446767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Research reported in this publication was 
supported by the National Institute Of Arthritis And Musculoskeletal And Skin 
Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number U19AR076737. 
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The Back Pain 
Consortium (BACPAC) Research Program is administered by the National Institute 
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS).


21. J Behav Addict. 2021 Jul 15;10(3):482-497. doi: 10.1556/2006.2021.00020.

Awareness drives changes in reward value which predict eating behavior change: 
Probing reinforcement learning using experience sampling from mobile mindfulness 
training for maladaptive eating.

Taylor VA(1), Moseley I(1), Sun S(1), Smith R(2), Roy A(1), Ludwig VU(1)(3), 
Brewer JA(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Mindfulness Center, Brown School of Public Health and Warren Alpert Medical 
School, Brown University, 121 South Main Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
(2)2 Laureate Institute for Brain Research, 6655 South Yale Ave, Tulsa, OK 
74136, USA.
(3)3 Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine & Wharton 
Neuroscience Initiative, University of Pennsylvania, 106 Steinberg-Dietrich 
Hall, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Maladaptive eating habits are a major cause of obesity and 
weight-related illness. The development of empirically-based approaches, such as 
mindfulness training (MT) that target accurate mechanisms of action to address 
these behaviors is therefore critical. Two studies were conducted to examine the 
impact of MT on maladaptive eating and determine the involvement of 
reinforcement learning mechanisms underlying these effects.
METHODS: In Study1, maladaptive eating behaviors were assessed using self-report 
questionnaires at baseline and 8 weeks after an app-based MT intervention (n = 
46). A novel mindful eating craving tool was embedded in our intervention to 
assess: eating behaviors (intake frequency/magnitude), and reward (contentment 
ratings) experienced after eating. Using a well-established reinforcement 
learning (Rescorla-Wagner) model, expected reward values (EV) were estimated as 
a function of contentment levels reported after eating. In Study2 (n = 1,119), 
craving tool assessments were examined in an independent sample using the app in 
a real-world naturalistic context.
RESULTS: Study 1's results revealed a significant decrease in EV and eating 
behaviors across craving tool uses. In addition, changes in reward values 
predicted decreases in eating behaviors. Finally, Study 1's results revealed 
significant pre-post intervention reductions in self-reported eating behaviors. 
In Study2, we observed a significant decrease in EV, but not in eating 
behaviors, across craving tool uses. Study 2 also revealed a predictive 
relationship between EV and eating behaviors.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: These results support the implementation of MT to 
prevent and treat maladaptive eating behaviors, which target reinforcement 
learning processes as mechanisms of action.

DOI: 10.1556/2006.2021.00020
PMCID: PMC8997232
PMID: 34264854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Brewer is paid advisor to Sharecare, the 
company that owns the mindfulness app used in this study. This financial 
interest has been disclosed to and is being managed by Brown University, in 
accordance with its Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment policies, 
including: (1) being restricted from recruitment, (2) being blinded to study 
group until after analysis, (3) not having access to data or performing 
analyses. All other authors report no biomedical financial interests or 
potential conflicts of interest.


22. J Med Internet Res. 2025 Sep 9;27:e69297. doi: 10.2196/69297.

Ecological Momentary Assessment as a Measure of Intervention Change: Evaluation 
in 4 Digital Mental Health Trials.

Webb CA(1)(2), Hilt LM(3), Swords CM(4), Bolt DM(5), Fisher H(1)(2), Goldberg 
SB(4).

Author information:
(1)McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, United States.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Psychology, Lawrence University, Appleton, WI, United States.
(4)Center for Healthy Minds and Department of Counseling Psychology, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(5)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, United States.

BACKGROUND: Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) is increasingly being 
incorporated into intervention studies to acquire a more fine-grained and 
ecologically valid assessment of change. The added utility of including 
relatively burdensome EMA measures in a clinical trial hinges on several 
psychometric assumptions, including that these measure are (1) reliable, (2) 
related to but not redundant with conventional self-report measures (convergent 
and discriminant validity), (3) sensitive to intervention-related change, and 
(4) associated with a clinically relevant criterion of improvement (criterion 
validity) above conventional self-report measures (incremental validity).
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the reliability, validity, and 
sensitivity to change of conventional self-report versus EMA measures of 
rumination improvement.
METHODS: We conducted a secondary analysis of data from 4 trials of app-based 
meditation interventions (N=412). Participants included adolescents (samples 
1-2; n=232, 56.3%; aged 12-15 years), college students (sample 3; n=88, 21.4%; 
aged 18-21 years), and adults (sample 4; n=92, 22.3%; aged 18-80 years). All 
participants completed validated conventional self-report rumination measures 
(Children's Response Styles Questionnaire, Response Styles Questionnaire, or 
Perseverative Thinking Questionnaire) at baseline and the postintervention time 
point and EMA rumination assessments throughout 3- to 4-week intervention 
periods (mean compliance 72.2%-80.2%). We examined the reliability of 
conventional self-report and EMA measures, computed correlations between 
measurement approaches, compared rumination improvement using standardized 
effect sizes, and tested criterion validity by predicting depression symptom 
improvement.
RESULTS: Reliability of conventional self-report rumination was high at baseline 
(Cronbach α=0.89-0.94) and the postintervention time point (Cronbach 
α=0.90-0.95) but decreased for residualized change scores (ρ= 0.71-0.90). EMA 
rumination showed high mean-level reliability (ρ=0.89-0.96) but substantially 
lower reliability for change scores (ρ=0.50-0.77). Conventional self-report and 
EMA measures showed medium correlations at individual time points (r=0.28-0.47; 
P<.01 in all cases) but nonsignificant correlations between change scores (Child 
and Adolescent Research in Emotion samples: r=0.03 and P=.66; Healthy Minds 
Program sample: r=0.20 and P=.06). Conventional self-report detected larger 
intervention effects than EMA measures (Cohen d=0.37 vs 0.14 for group 
differences; Cohen d=0.77 vs 0.17 for pretest-posttest change). Despite modest 
intercorrelations, both measurement approaches demonstrated incremental 
predictive validity for depression improvement. In the Child and Adolescent 
Research in Emotion samples, improvements in both conventional rumination 
(b=0.04; SE 0.017; P=.03) and EMA rumination (b=0.03; SE 0.014; P=.04) 
significantly predicted reduced depression symptoms until the 12-week follow-up. 
Similarly, in the Healthy Minds Program sample, both conventional rumination 
change (b=0.23; SE 0.060; P<.001) and EMA rumination change (b=20.49; SE 9.94; 
P=.04) predicted depression improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Conventional self-report and EMA measures of rumination provide 
distinct and clinically meaningful information. When deciding to use EMA in 
intervention studies, researchers should carefully consider the psychometric 
properties of their measures and the precise construct they intend to capture.

©Christian A Webb, Lori M Hilt, Caroline M Swords, Daniel M Bolt, Hadar Fisher, 
Simon B Goldberg. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (https://www.jmir.org), 09.09.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/69297
PMCID: PMC12457869
PMID: 40924996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: CAW has received 
consulting fees from the King & Spalding law firm for work unrelated to this 
publication.


23. Sleep Health. 2021 Feb;7(1):105-112. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2020.07.005. Epub 2020 
Oct 1.

Sleep health is associated with next-day mindful attention in healthcare 
workers.

Lee S(1), Mu C(2), Gonzalez BD(3), Vinci CE(3), Small BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Aging Studies, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA. 
Electronic address: soomilee@usf.edu.
(2)School of Aging Studies, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Health Outcomes and Behavior, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, 
Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have focused on the role of mindfulness in 
improving sleep health. Sleep health may also increase daily mindfulness; 
however, this potential directionality is understudied, with a lack of research 
on healthcare workers who need high-quality sleep and mindful attention for 
patient care. This study examined whether sleep health predicts next-day mindful 
attention, and vice versa, in nurses.
DESIGN: Smartphone-based ecological momentary assessment.
SETTING: U.S. hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: Sixty-one full-time nurses.
MEASUREMENTS: For 2 consecutive weeks, participants provided actigraphy-measured 
and self-reported daily sleep characteristics. We examined 8 sleep variables 
across 5 key dimensions: satisfaction (self-report of sleep sufficiency, 
quality, and insomnia symptoms), alertness (self-report of daytime sleepiness), 
timing (actigraphy bed- and wake- times), efficiency (actigraphy percentage of 
time spent asleep during time in bed), and duration (actigraphy sleep duration). 
Participants reported state mindfulness specific to attention and awareness. 
Covariates included previous night's sleep, sociodemographics, work shift, 
workday (vs. nonworkday), and weekend (vs. weekday).
RESULTS: Multilevel modeling revealed that, at the within-person level, after 
nights with greater sleep sufficiency, better sleep quality, lower efficiency, 
and longer sleep duration, daily mindful attention was greater than usual. Daily 
mindful attention was inversely associated with sleepiness, but not predictive 
of other sleep characteristics. At the between-person level, participants with 
greater sleep sufficiency, higher sleep quality, and fewer insomnia symptoms 
reported greater mindful attention overall.
CONCLUSION: Findings show that optimal sleep health is an antecedent of daily 
mindful attention in nurses. Improving sleep may provide important benefits to 
their well-being and to the quality of patient care.

Copyright © 2020 National Sleep Foundation. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleh.2020.07.005
PMID: 33012668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflict of interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.


24. Contemp Clin Trials. 2018 Mar;66:36-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2017.12.014. Epub 
2017 Dec 27.

Rationale, design and pilot feasibility results of a smartphone-assisted, 
mindfulness-based intervention for smokers with mood disorders: Project mSMART 
MIND.

Minami H(1), Brinkman HR(2), Nahvi S(3), Arnsten JH(3), Rivera-Mindt M(2), 
Wetter DW(4), Bloom EL(5), Price LH(6), Vieira C(2), Donnelly R(2), McClain 
LM(2), Kennedy KA(2), D'Aquila E(7), Fine M(8), McCarthy DE(9), Graham Thomas 
J(10), Hecht J(11), Brown RA(11).

Author information:
(1)Fordham University, United States. Electronic address: hminami@fordham.edu.
(2)Fordham University, United States.
(3)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, United 
States.
(4)University of Utah, United States.
(5)Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, United 
States.
(6)Butler Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, United States.
(7)ICAP at Columbia University, United States.
(8)Mindful Living, United States.
(9)Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, United States.
(10)Weight Control and Diabetes Research Center, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, United States.
(11)University of Texas at Austin, United States.

BACKGROUND: Although individuals with psychiatric disorders are 
disproportionately affected by cigarette smoking, few outpatient mental health 
treatment facilities offer smoking cessation services. In this paper, we 
describe the development of a smartphone-assisted mindfulness smoking cessation 
intervention with contingency management (SMI-CM), as well as the design and 
methods of an ongoing pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) targeting smokers 
receiving outpatient psychiatric treatment. We also report the results of an 
open-label pilot feasibility study.
METHODS: In phase 1, we developed and pilot-tested SMI-CM, which includes a 
smartphone intervention app that prompts participants to practice mindfulness, 
complete ecological momentary assessment (EMA) reports 5 times per day, and 
submit carbon monoxide (CO) videos twice per day. Participants earned incentives 
if submitted videos showed CO≤6ppm. In phase 2, smokers receiving outpatient 
treatment for mood disorders are randomized to receive SMI-CM or enhanced 
standard treatment plus non-contingent CM (EST).
RESULTS: The results from the pilot feasibility study (N=8) showed that 
participants practiced mindfulness an average of 3.4times/day (≥3min), completed 
72.3% of prompted EMA reports, and submitted 68.0% of requested CO videos. 
Participants reported that the program was helpful overall (M=4.85/5) and that 
daily mindfulness practice was helpful for both managing mood and quitting 
smoking (Ms=4.50/5).
CONCLUSIONS: The results from the feasibility study indicated high levels of 
acceptability and satisfaction with SMI-CM. The ongoing RCT will allow 
evaluation of the efficacy and mechanisms of action underlying SMI-CM for 
improving cessation rates among smokers with mood disorders.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cct.2017.12.014
PMCID: PMC5841579
PMID: 29288740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur Psychiatry. 2024 May 7;67(1):e40. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2024.1750.

Treatment condition as a moderator and change in trait mindfulness as a mediator 
of a brief mindfulness ecological momentary intervention for generalized anxiety 
disorder.

Zainal NH(1)(2), Newman MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge, 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Theories propose that judgment of and reactivity to inner 
experiences are mediators of the effect of mindfulness-based interventions on 
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). However, no study has tested such theories 
using brief, mindfulness ecological momentary intervention (MEMI). We thus 
tested these theories using a 14-day MEMI versus self-monitoring app (SM) 
control for GAD.
METHODS: Participants (N = 110) completed self-reports of trait mindfulness 
(Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire), GAD severity (GAD-Questionnaire-IV), and 
trait perseverative cognitions (Perseverative Cognitions Questionnaire) at 
prerandomization, posttreatment, and 1-month follow-up (1MFU). Counterfactual 
mediation analyses with temporal precedence were conducted.
RESULTS: Improvement in pre-post mindfulness domains (acceptance of emotions, 
describing feelings accurately, acting with awareness, judgment of inner 
experience, and reactivity to inner experience) predicted pre-1MFU reduction in 
GAD severity and pre-1MFU reduction in trait perseverative cognitions from MEMI 
but not SM. MEMI reduced pre-post reactivity to inner experiences (but not other 
mindfulness domains) significantly more than SM. Only reduced pre-post 
reactivity significantly mediated stronger efficacy of MEMI over SM on pre-1MFU 
reductions in GAD severity (indirect effect: β = -2.970 [-5.034, -0.904], 
p = .008; b path: β = -3.313 [-6.350, -0.276], p = .033; percentage mediated: 
30.5%) and trait perseverative cognitions (indirect effect: β = -0.153 [-0.254, 
-0.044], p = .008; b path: β = -0.145 [-0.260, -0.030], p = .014; percentage 
mediated: 42.7%). Other trait mindfulness domains were non-significant 
mediators.
CONCLUSIONS: Reactivity to inner experience might be a mindfulness-based 
intervention change mechanism and should be targeted to optimize brief MEMIs for 
GAD.

DOI: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2024.1750
PMCID: PMC11363003
PMID: 38711385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors report no conflict of interest.


26. Health Psychol. 2019 Jan;38(1):94-102. doi: 10.1037/hea0000692. Epub 2018 Oct 
29.

The role of state and trait positive affect and mindfulness in affective 
reactivity to pain in chronic migraine.

Ciere Y(1), Snippe E(2), Padberg M(3), Jacobs B(4), Visser A(5), Sanderman R(1), 
Fleer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Psychology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center Psychopathology and Emotion Regulation, University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen.
(3)Department of Neurology, Martini Hospital.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen.
(5)Department of Applied Health Research, University Medical Center Groningen.

OBJECTIVE: High affective reactivity to pain (i.e., increased negative affect in 
response to pain) can have an adverse impact on the well-being of individuals 
with chronic pain. The present study examined the role of momentary and average 
positive affect and trait mindfulness in protecting against affective reactivity 
to chronic migraine-related pain.
METHODS: The sample included 61 adults with chronic migraine. Following the 
experience sampling method, participants completed smartphone-based assessments 
of momentary pain intensity (PI), positive affect (PA), and negative affect (NA) 
at nine random moments a day for 7 consecutive days. The Five-Facet Mindfulness 
Questionnaire was used to assess two dimensions of mindfulness: nonjudging and 
nonreactivity.
RESULTS: Momentary PA inversely predicted the strength of the concurrent but not 
the time-lagged associations between PI and NA. Average PA predicted neither the 
strength of the concurrent nor the time-lagged associations between PI and NA. 
Furthermore, the concurrent associations between PI and NA were weaker in 
individuals who reported higher "nonjudging" while "nonreactivity" did not 
significantly moderate these associations.
CONCLUSIONS: Results provide partial support for the dynamic model of affect in 
the context of chronic migraine. State PA seems to play a larger role in 
momentary affective reactivity to chronic migraine-related pain than trait PA. 
Results also suggest that the ability to take a nonjudgmental stance toward 
negative experiences may lower momentary affective reactivity to pain. These 
factors seem promising targets for interventions aimed at improving the 
well-being of individuals with chronic migraine. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 
2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/hea0000692
PMID: 30372104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Front Psychol. 2022 Nov 29;13:1054292. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1054292. 
eCollection 2022.

The Qwantify app dataset: A remote experience sampling study of desire, emotion, 
and well-being.

Wilson-Mendenhall CD(1), Condon P(2), Hasenkamp W(3), MacKerron G(4), Quigley 
KS(5), Barrett LF(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
United States.
(2)Department of Psychology, Southern Oregon University, Ashland, OR, United 
States.
(3)Mind & Life Institute, Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(4)Department of Economics, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, United States.

Experiences of desire-the feeling of wanting to have, do, or experience 
something-are pervasive and varied. Recent theoretical advances draw attention 
to characterizing this variation. Thus, this study investigated experiences of 
desire in everyday life and co-occurring social, physical, and emotional states, 
including facets of emotional experiences known to be related to well-being 
(e.g., perceived loneliness and stress). The Qwantify app was designed to run a 
remote experience sampling study. Through the app, participants were randomly 
alerted during their daily life to report on their experience in the moment. 
During the data collection period, any individual could download the freely 
available Qwantify app and participate in the study, without providing 
identifying information or communicating with researchers. Similar to other 
remote experience sampling studies, an incentive for participants to engage in 
the study was unlocking visualizations of their own data. Over 600 participants 
downloaded the app, completed the sign-up process, and responded to at least one 
experience sampling alert. Approximately 40% of these participants went on to 
respond to 50 alerts. The purpose of this report is to describe this experience 
sampling dataset such that it can be used to test a variety of hypotheses, 
including hypotheses regarding individual differences.

Copyright © 2022 Wilson-Mendenhall, Condon, Hasenkamp, MacKerron, Quigley and 
Barrett.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1054292
PMCID: PMC9745310
PMID: 36524170

Conflict of interest statement: WH was employed by the Mind & Life Institute at 
the time of this study. GM was the CTO of Psychological Technologies (PSYT), the 
company who was paid to develop the Qwantify app, at the time of this study. 
CW-M had served as a consultant to the non-profit Healthy Minds Innovations. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.


28. Npj Ment Health Res. 2023 Aug 22;2(1):13. doi: 10.1038/s44184-023-00033-y.

Digital transformation of mental health services.

Bond RR(1), Mulvenna MD(2), Potts C(3), O'Neill S(3), Ennis E(3), Torous J(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, Ulster University, Belfast, UK. rb.bond@ulster.ac.uk.
(2)School of Computing, Ulster University, Belfast, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, Ulster University, Coleraine, UK.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

This paper makes a case for digital mental health and provides insights into how 
digital technologies can enhance (but not replace) existing mental health 
services. We describe digital mental health by presenting a suite of digital 
technologies (from digital interventions to the application of artificial 
intelligence). We discuss the benefits of digital mental health, for example, a 
digital intervention can be an accessible stepping-stone to receiving support. 
The paper does, however, present less-discussed benefits with new concepts such 
as 'poly-digital', where many different apps/features (e.g. a sleep app, mood 
logging app and a mindfulness app, etc.) can each address different factors of 
wellbeing, perhaps resulting in an aggregation of marginal gains. Another 
benefit is that digital mental health offers the ability to collect 
high-resolution real-world client data and provide client monitoring outside of 
therapy sessions. These data can be collected using digital phenotyping and 
ecological momentary assessment techniques (i.e. repeated mood or scale measures 
via an app). This allows digital mental health tools and real-world data to 
inform therapists and enrich face-to-face sessions. This can be referred to as 
blended care/adjunctive therapy where service users can engage in 'channel 
switching' between digital and non-digital (face-to-face) interventions 
providing a more integrated service. This digital integration can be referred to 
as a kind of 'digital glue' that helps join up the in-person sessions with the 
real world. The paper presents the challenges, for example, the majority of 
mental health apps are maybe of inadequate quality and there is a lack of user 
retention. There are also ethical challenges, for example, with the perceived 
'over-promotion' of screen-time and the perceived reduction in care when 
replacing humans with 'computers', and the trap of 'technological solutionism' 
whereby technology can be naively presumed to solve all problems. Finally, we 
argue for the need to take an evidence-based, systems thinking and co-production 
approach in the form of stakeholder-centred design when developing digital 
mental health services based on technologies. The main contribution of this 
paper is the integration of ideas from many different disciplines as well as the 
framework for blended care using 'channel switching' to showcase how digital 
data and technology can enrich physical services. Another contribution is the 
emergence of 'poly-digital' and a discussion on the challenges of digital mental 
health, specifically 'digital ethics'.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44184-023-00033-y
PMCID: PMC10955947
PMID: 38609479

Conflict of interest statement: This section includes competing interests and/or 
potential competing interests. The authors declare competing financial and 
non-financial interests. R.R.B., M.D.M., E.E. and S.O. are 
investigators/researchers of the MENHIR project (https://menhir-project.eu, 
‘Mental health monitoring through interactive conversations’, funded by H2020 EU 
research and innovation programme, grant agreement no: 823907). R.R.B. and 
M.D.M. are members of the editorial board for npj Mental Health Research. 
R.R.B., M.D.M., C.P., E.E. and S.O. were also investigators/researchers on the 
ChatPal project (https://chatpal.interreg-npa.eu/) which is an example project 
that is also described in this paper. R.R.B. and M.D.M. are also current 
co-principal investigators on a government funded project (KTP, Innovate UK) 
with Action Mental Health in Northern Ireland to help digitally transform mental 
health services. M.D.M. is co-founder and director of Pneuma Healthcare. S.O. is 
the Mental Health Champion for Northern Ireland. J.T. is co-founder and a board 
member of Precision Mental Wellness. R.R.B. and M.D.M. are members of the 
Digital Mental Health Forum in Northern Ireland.


29. Emotion. 2018 Mar;18(2):202-211. doi: 10.1037/emo0000323. Epub 2017 May 8.

Pathways to happiness are multidirectional: Associations between state 
mindfulness and everyday affective experience.

Blanke ES(1), Riediger M(2), Brose A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.
(2)Heisenberg Research Group Socio-emotional Development and Health Across the 
Lifespan, Freie Universität Berlin.

Mindfulness is commonly defined as a multidimensional mode of being attentive 
to, and aware of, momentary experiences while taking a nonjudgmental and 
accepting stance. These qualities have been linked to 2 different facets of 
affective well-being: being attentive is proposed to lead to an appreciation of 
experiences as they are, and thus to positive affect (PA). Accepting unpleasant 
experiences in a nonjudgmental fashion has been hypothesized to reduce negative 
affect (NA). Alternatively, however, attention may increase both positive and 
negative affectivity, whereas nonjudgmental acceptance may modify how people 
relate to their experiences. Previous research has considered such differential 
associations at the trait level, although a mindful mode may be understood as a 
state of being. Using an experience-sampling methodology (ESM) with smartphones, 
the present research therefore links different state mindfulness facets to 
positive and NA in daily life. Seventy students (50% female, 20-30 years old) of 
different disciplines participated in the study. Based on multidimensional 
assessments of self-reported state mindfulness and state affect, the findings 
corroborate the hypotheses on the differential predictive value of 2 mindfulness 
facets: Participants experienced more PA when they were attentive to the present 
moment and less NA when they nonjudgmentally accepted momentary experiences. 
Furthermore, only nonjudgmental acceptance buffered the impact of daily hassles 
on affective well-being. The study contributes to a more fine-grained 
understanding of the within-person mechanisms relating mindfulness to affective 
well-being in daily life. Future interventions may be able to enhance different 
aspects of affective well-being by addressing specific facets of mindfulness. 
(PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/emo0000323
PMID: 28481572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nicotine Tob Res. 2023 Apr 6;25(5):996-1003. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntac253.

Models for Zero-Inflated and Overdispersed Correlated Count Data: An Application 
to Cigarette Use.

Pittman B(1), Buta E(2), Garrison K(1), Gueorguieva R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Count outcomes in tobacco research are often analyzed with the 
Poisson distribution. However, they often exhibit features such as 
overdispersion (variance larger than expected) and zero inflation (extra zeros) 
that violate model assumptions. Furthermore, longitudinal studies have repeated 
measures that generate correlated counts. Failure to account for overdispersion, 
zero inflation, and correlation can yield incorrect statistical inferences. 
Thus, it is important to familiarize researchers with proper models for such 
data.
AIMS AND METHODS: Poisson and Negative Binomial models with correlated random 
effects with and without zero inflation are presented. The illustrative data 
comes from a study comparing a mindfulness training app (Craving to Quit [C2Q], 
n = 60) with a control app (experience sampling-only app, n = 66) on smoking 
frequency at 1, 3, and 6 months. Predictors include app, time, the app-by-time 
interaction, and baseline smoking. Each model is evaluated in terms of 
accounting for zero inflation, overdispersion, and correlation in the data. 
Emphasis is placed on evaluating model fit, subject-specific interpretation of 
effects, and choosing an appropriate model.
RESULTS: The hurdle Poisson model provided the best fit to the data. Smoking 
abstinence rates were 33%, 32%, and 28% at 1, 3, and 6 months, respectively, 
with variance larger than expected by a factor >7 at each follow-up. Individuals 
on C2Q were less likely to achieve abstinence across time but likely to smoke 
fewer cigarettes if smoking.
CONCLUSIONS: The models presented are specifically suited for analyzing 
correlated count outcomes and account for zero inflation and overdispersion. We 
provide guidance to researchers on the use of these models to better inform 
nicotine and tobacco research.
IMPLICATIONS: In tobacco research, count outcomes are often measured repeatedly 
on the same subject and thus correlated. Such outcomes often have many zeros and 
exhibit large variances relative to the mean. Analyzing such data require models 
specifically suited for correlated counts. The presented models and guidelines 
could improve the rigor of the analysis of correlated count data and thus 
increase the impact of studies in nicotine and tobacco research using such 
outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ntr/ntac253
PMCID: PMC10077942
PMID: 36318799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Sleep Health. 2022 Oct;8(5):505-513. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2022.05.008. Epub 2022 
Jul 21.

Beneficial effects of sleep extension on daily emotion in short-sleeping young 
adults: An experience sampling study.

Parsons CE(1), Young KS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Interacting Minds Center, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark. Electronic address: christine.parsons@clin.au.dk.
(2)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; NIHR 
Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: Short sleep duration has been linked to disrupted emotional 
experiences and poor emotion regulation. Extending sleep opportunity might 
therefore offer a means to improve emotion functioning. This study used 
experience sampling to examine the effect of sleep extension on daily emotion 
experiences and emotion regulation.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants were young adults (n = 72), aged 18-24 years who 
reported consistently sleeping less than 7 hours in a 24-hour period in the past 
2 weeks.
DESIGN AND SETTING: For 14 consecutive days, participants completed experience 
sampling questions related to sleep, emotion, and emotion regulation via a 
smartphone application. Procedures were identical for all participants for the 
first 7 days ("baseline" assessments).
INTERVENTION: From days 8-14, participants were randomly assigned to either a 
"sleep extension" condition, in which they were instructed to increase their 
sleep opportunity by 90 minutes or a "sleep as usual" condition.
MEASUREMENTS: Duration and quality of the previous night's sleep were reported 
each morning and daytime experiences of positive and negative emotion and 
emotion regulation were measured at pseudorandom timepoints 6 times a day.
RESULTS: Multilevel modeling demonstrated that participants in the sleep 
extension condition reported significantly longer sleep times and improved sleep 
quality, as well as higher positive and lower negative daily emotion, compared 
to those in the sleep as usual condition.
CONCLUSION: A brief experimental paradigm to extend sleep length has the 
potential to improve sleep quality and to a minor extent mood, among young 
adults with short sleep.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleh.2022.05.008
PMID: 35872150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. JMIR Ment Health. 2025 May 13;12:e67210. doi: 10.2196/67210.

Prescriptive Predictors of Mindfulness Ecological Momentary Intervention for 
Social Anxiety Disorder: Machine Learning Analysis of Randomized Controlled 
Trial Data.

Zainal NH(1), Tan HH(1), Hong RYS(1), Newman MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Shame and stigma often prevent individuals with social anxiety 
disorder (SAD) from seeking and attending costly and time-intensive 
psychotherapies, highlighting the importance of brief, low-cost, and scalable 
treatments. Creating prescriptive outcome prediction models is thus crucial for 
identifying which clients with SAD might gain the most from a unique scalable 
treatment option. Nevertheless, widely used classical regression methods might 
not optimally capture complex nonlinear associations and interactions.
OBJECTIVE: Precision medicine approaches were thus harnessed to examine 
prescriptive predictors of optimization to a 14-day fully self-guided 
mindfulness ecological momentary intervention (MEMI) over a self-monitoring app 
(SM).
METHODS: This study involved 191 participants who had probable SAD. Participants 
were randomly assigned to MEMI (n=96) or SM (n=95). They completed self-reports 
of symptoms, risk factors, treatment, and sociodemographics at baseline, 
posttreatment, and 1-month follow-up (1MFU). Machine learning (ML) models with 
17 predictors of optimization to MEMI over SM, defined as a higher probability 
of SAD remission from MEMI at posttreatment and 1MFU, were evaluated. The Social 
Phobia Diagnostic Questionnaire, structurally equivalent to the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual SAD criteria, was used to define remission. These ML models 
included random forest and support vector machines (radial basis function 
kernel) and 10-fold nested cross-validation that separated model training, 
minimal tuning in inner folds, and model testing in outer folds.
RESULTS: ML models outperformed logistic regression. The multivariable ML models 
using the 10 most important predictors achieved good performance, with the area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AU-ROC) values ranging from 
.71 to .72 at posttreatment and 1MFU. These prerandomization and early-stage 
prescriptive predictors consistently identified which participants had the 
highest probability of optimization of MEMI over SM after 14 days and 6 weeks 
from baseline. Significant predictors included 4 strengths (higher trait 
mindfulness, lower SAD severity, presence of university education, no current 
psychotropic medication use), 2 weaknesses (higher generalized anxiety severity 
and clinician-diagnosed depression or anxiety disorder), and 1 sociodemographic 
variable (Chinese ethnicity). Emotion dysregulation and current psychotherapy 
predicted remission with inconsistent signs across time points.
CONCLUSIONS: The AU-ROC values indicated moderately meaningful effect sizes in 
identifying prescriptive predictors within multivariable models for clients with 
SAD. Focusing on the identified notable client strengths, weaknesses, and 
Chinese ethnicity may enhance our ability to predict future responses to 
scalable treatments. Estimating the likelihood of SAD remission with a 
"prescriptive predictor calculator" for each client may help clinicians and 
policymakers allocate scarce treatment resources effectively. Clients with high 
remission probability may benefit from receiving the MEMI as a vigilant waitlist 
strategy before intensive therapist-led psychotherapy. These efforts may aid in 
creating actionable treatment selection tools to optimize care for clients with 
SAD in routine health care settings that use stratified care principles.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: OSF Registries 10.17605/OSF.IO/M3KXZ; https://osf.io/m3kxz.

©Nur Hani Zainal, Hui Han Tan, Ryan Yee Shiun Hong, Michelle Gayle Newman. 
Originally published in JMIR Mental Health (https://mental.jmir.org), 
13.05.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/67210
PMCID: PMC12117280
PMID: 40359509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


33. JMIR Ment Health. 2023 Jul 19;10:e44365. doi: 10.2196/44365.

Effects of Induced Mindfulness at Night on Repetitive Negative Thinking: 
Ecological Momentary Assessment Study.

Sommerhoff A(1), Ehring T(1), Takano K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, 
Germany.
(2)Human Informatics and Interaction Research Institute, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Repetitive negative thinking (RNT) is a cognitive risk factor for 
various disorders. Although brief mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs; lasting 
20-30 minutes or shorter) are effective tools to reduce RNT, the effect of a 
minimal (5-minute) MBI remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the acute changes in RNT induced by a 10-day minimal 
MBI (body scan before sleeping) using an ecological momentary assessment (EMA) 
administered during the MBI training phase. In addition, we examined longer-term 
effects on the postintervention and 2-month follow-up assessments for 
questionnaire-based RNT and psychological distress.
METHODS: A total of 68 participants (community sample, aged 18-55 years; n=58, 
85% women) were randomly allocated to either the intervention group (n=35, 51%) 
or the no-training control group (n=33, 49%). Both groups completed a 10-day EMA 
phase of RNT, during which only the intervention group performed a daily 
5-minute body scan before sleeping.
RESULTS: The intervention group showed a significantly larger reduction in 
questionnaire-based RNT than the control group at the follow-up assessment (for 
growth-curve modeling analysis [GMA], dGMA=-0.91; P<.001), but this effect was 
not observed during the EMA phase or at the postintervention assessment. 
Furthermore, the intervention group showed significantly larger decreases in 
stress both at the postintervention (dGMA=-0.78; P<.001) and follow-up 
(dGMA=-0.60; P<.001) assessments than the control group. We found no 
intervention effects on depressive and anxiety symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: A 5-minute body scan before sleeping reduces RNT and stress when 
continued for at least 10 days; however, the results suggest that this effect 
only appears with some time lag because no acute changes during and immediately 
after the intervention emerged for RNT.

©Amanda Sommerhoff, Thomas Ehring, Keisuke Takano. Originally published in JMIR 
Mental Health (https://mental.jmir.org), 19.07.2023.

DOI: 10.2196/44365
PMCID: PMC10398553
PMID: 37467038

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


34. Mindfulness (N Y). 2021 Oct;12(10):2498-2509. doi: 10.1007/s12671-021-01719-0. 
Epub 2021 Aug 9.

App-based Mindfulness Training for Adolescent Rumination: Predictors of 
Immediate and Cumulative Benefit.

Webb CA(1), Swords CM(2), Murray L(1), Hilt LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School & McLean Hospital, Boston, MA.
(2)Lawrence University, Appleton, WI.

OBJECTIVES: Rumination is a transdiagnostic risk factor for depression and 
anxiety, which surge during the adolescent years. Mindfulness training - with 
its emphasis on metacognitive awareness and present-moment attention - may be 
effective at reducing rumination. Mindfulness apps offer a convenient, engaging, 
and cost-effective means for accessing mindfulness training for teens. Despite 
their increasing popularity among adolescents, no study to date has investigated 
which teens are well-suited to app-based mindfulness training.
METHODS: Eighty adolescents (M age = 14.01 years, 45% girls) with elevated 
rumination were enrolled in a 3-week trial of app-based mindfulness training. 
Repeated daily ecological momentary assessment (EMA) surveys assessed 
problem-focused and emotion-focused rumination immediately prior to and 
following each mindfulness exercise. Elastic net regularization (ENR) models 
tested baseline predictors of "immediate" (post-mindfulness exercise) and 
"cumulative" (post-3-week intervention) benefit from app-based mindfulness 
training.
RESULTS: Ninety percent (72/80) of adolescents completed the 3-week trial, and 
the mean number of mindfulness exercises completed was 28.7. Baseline adolescent 
characteristics accounted for 14%-25% of the variance in outcomes (i.e., 
reduction in problem-focused or emotion-focused rumination). Higher baseline 
rumination, and lower emotional suppression, predicted better immediate and 
cumulative outcomes. In contrast, female gender and older age predicted better 
immediate, but not cumulative, outcomes. Differences in results across outcome 
timeframes (immediate vs. cumulative) are discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study highlight the potential of data-driven 
approaches to inform which adolescent characteristics may predict benefit from 
engaging with an app-based mindfulness training program. Additional research is 
needed to test these predictive models against a comparison (non-mindfulness) 
condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s12671-021-01719-0
PMCID: PMC9009760
PMID: 35432625

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


35. J Psychosom Res. 2022 Mar;154:110724. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2022.110724. 
Epub 2022 Jan 17.

Changed dynamic symptom networks after a self-compassion training in patients 
with somatic symptom disorder: A multiple single-case pilot project.

Houtveen JH(1), van Eck van der Sluijs J(2), Thorsell S(2), van 
Broeckhuysen-Kloth S(3), Geenen R(4).

Author information:
(1)Altrecht Psychosomatic Medicine, Zeist, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
J.Houtveen@altrecht.nl.
(2)Altrecht Psychosomatic Medicine, Zeist, the Netherlands.
(3)Bartimeus, Zeist, the Netherlands.
(4)Altrecht Psychosomatic Medicine, Zeist, the Netherlands; Utrecht University, 
Department of Psychology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Pre-to-post mean group differences of intermittently assessed generic 
outcome variables may not capture all relevant treatment-related changes in 
individual patients with somatic symptom disorder (SSD). Aim of this multiple 
single-case observational pilot project was to find out whether the Experience 
Sampling Method (ESM) and dynamic symptom networks may offer new opportunities 
in evaluating treatment outcomes for individual patients with SSD.
METHODS: Patients with SSD (N = 6 in study 1, N = 7 in study 2) received a 
self-compassion training in a tertiary care mental health expert center. Using a 
single-case pre-post treatment observational design, intensive longitudinal data 
were collected with ESM. A brief questionnaire was presented via the patient's 
smartphone three times per day for 16 weeks before, during and after the 
training in study 1, and for 5 weeks before and 5 weeks after the training in 
study 2. Eleven questions comprised somatic symptoms, functional disability, 
stress, self-compassion, and acceptance of affect; three personalized questions 
comprised self-chosen affects and an additional symptom.
RESULTS: Sufficient observations for means and network comparison were obtained 
for 11 and 10 patients, respectively. After the training, self-compassion was 
significantly increased in 10 patients, functional disability, stress and affect 
improved in 6 patients, and (although not a treatment goal) somatic symptoms 
decreased in 6 patients. Dynamic symptom networks significantly changed in 5 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Patient-specific changes in means and dynamic symptom networks were 
observed after self-compassion training. In future clinical trials, single-case 
ESM may offer new opportunities to evaluate treatment outcomes in patients with 
SSD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2022.110724
PMID: 35078078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2024 Aug;92(8):531-541. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000857.

Does it matter how meditation feels? An experience sampling study.

Goldberg SB(1), Bolt DM(2), Dahl CJ(3), Davidson RJ(3), Hirshberg MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Counseling Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(2)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(3)Center for Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

OBJECTIVE: Meditation apps are the most widely used mental health apps. The 
precise mechanisms underlying their effects remain unclear. In particular, the 
degree to which affect experienced during meditation is associated with outcomes 
has not been established.
METHOD: We used the meditation app arm of a recently completed randomized 
controlled trial comparing a self-guided meditation app (Healthy Minds Program) 
to a waitlist control. Predominantly distressed public school employees (n = 
243, 80.9% with clinically elevated depression and/or anxiety) reported positive 
and negative affect during meditation practice. Data were analyzed using 
two-level multivariate latent growth curve models (observations nested within 
participants) that simultaneously attended to both positive and negative affect. 
We examined whether positive and negative affect during meditation changed over 
time and whether these changes were associated with changes in psychological 
distress (parent trial's preregistered primary outcome) at posttest or 3-month 
follow-up.
RESULTS: On average, participants reported decreased negative affect but no 
change in positive affect during meditation over time. Increased positive affect 
and decreased negative affect during meditation were associated with 
improvements in distress at posttest and follow-up. Change in positive affect 
was a stronger predictor of distress at follow-up than change in negative 
affect.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite notions embedded within mainstream mindfulness meditation 
training that deemphasize the importance of the affective experience of practice 
(i.e., nonjudgmental awareness of present moment experience, regardless of 
valence), results indicate that these experiences contain signals associated 
with outcomes. Monitoring affect during meditation may be worthwhile to guide 
intervention delivery (i.e., measurement-based care, precision medicine). 
(PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2024 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/ccp0000857
PMCID: PMC11448736
PMID: 39347788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Psychol. 2025 Jul 1;13(1):704. doi: 10.1186/s40359-025-03018-y.

Protocol for a randomized and a non-randomized controlled trial testing Daily 
Growth: a personalised 'ecological momentary intervention' parenting app for 
parents and carers of children aged 2-5 years.

Westrupp EM(1)(2), Bates M(3), Bufton KJ(4)(5), Berkowitz TB(4)(5), Popple 
M(4)(5)(6), King GL(4)(5), Jones S(6), Stone J(6), Kupper JJCF(7), Toumbourou 
JW(4)(5), Karmakar C(8), Havighurst SS(9)(10), Kehoe CE(9)(10), Angelova M(11), 
O'Shea M(4), Tarrant L(6), Olive LS(4)(5)(12), Evans S(4)(5), Ewald S(4)(5), 
Mikocka JM(4)(5), Little K(4)(13), Hesketh KD(14), Fuller-Tyszkiewicz M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, Australia. 
elizabeth.westrupp@deakin.edu.au.
(2)SEED Lifespan Strategic Research Centre, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, 
Australia. elizabeth.westrupp@deakin.edu.au.
(3)School of Communication & Creative Arts, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, 
Australia.
(4)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, Australia.
(5)SEED Lifespan Strategic Research Centre, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, 
Australia.
(6)Wayapa Wuurrk, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Applied Artificial Intelligence Initiative, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, 
Australia.
(8)School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Burwood, VIC, Australia.
(9)Mindful, Centre for Training and Research in Developmental Health, 
Travancore, Australia.
(10)Department Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Travancore, VIC, 3032, 
Australia.
(11)Sir Peter Rigby Digital Future Institute, Aston University, Aston Triangle, 
Birmingham, UK.
(12)Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, Faculty 
of Health, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(13), Meli, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(14)Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Deakin University, Geelong, 
VIC, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Children's ability to regulate their emotions is a critical 
protective factor for early mental health and development and is strongly 
influenced by parenting. Parenting programs can improve these outcomes for 
children, however, most families, particularly those from diverse or 
disadvantaged backgrounds, never receive evidence-based support. There is a 
pressing need for parenting programs that are widely accessible and meaningfully 
tailored to individual needs and real-time parenting challenges to enhance 
parent engagement. This protocol outlines the design of two staged trials 
testing Daily Growth, a universal parenting app for parents/carers of children 
2-5 years. The first trial will evaluate the app's effectiveness as implemented 
in a real-world community-based trial, while the second will develop and test a 
machine learning system for personalising support based on Trial 1 data.
METHODS: In Trial 1, parents/carers (n = 1,650) will be recruited and randomised 
to one of five groups: 150 to active control (government parenting website); 100 
each to one of three programs (Emotion Coaching, Active Play, or Wayapa Wuurrk); 
1,200 to a non-personalised random combination of all three. Trial 2 
(non-randomised) will recruit 400 parents/carers to receive personalised 
support, with program content from the three programs allocated via a machine 
learning algorithm based on baseline data. Both trials will run for six weeks 
where participants will receive twice-daily prompts to complete a 1-min 
pre-ecological momentary intervention (pre-EMI) survey and non-control 
participants offered three-minute videos tailored to specific parenting 
challenges. A post-EMI survey will be delivered 15 min later to assess immediate 
outcomes. Participants in both trials will complete baseline, six-week, and 
six-month follow-up surveys. Outcomes from the non-personalised trial will be 
compared to the fully personalised app and control/single program groups via EMI 
and post/follow-up on parenting and parent/child emotion regulation.
DISCUSSION: This study introduces a novel digital program combining co-designed 
parenting content, real-time delivery, tailoring to ensure practical relevance, 
and algorithm-driven personalisation. By testing standardised and personalised 
app versions, it will evaluate whether real-time personalised parenting support 
improves parent/child emotion regulation, engagement, and program acceptability. 
Findings will inform future approaches to scalable, inclusive, and responsive 
parenting support in early childhood.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial is registered with ANZCTR, registration number 
ACTRN12624000937516; ACTRN12624001023549, and includes all items from the WHO 
Trial Registration Data Set.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40359-025-03018-y
PMCID: PMC12217908
PMID: 40598667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The Daily Growth project has received ethics approval from the 
Deakin University Human Research Ethics Committee (2024–050), and the Victorian 
Department of Education’s ethics committee (24–11-488). Consent for publication: 
Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


38. JMIR Ment Health. 2022 May 10;9(5):e35273. doi: 10.2196/35273.

Momentary Self-regulation: Scale Development and Preliminary Validation.

Scherer EA(#)(1)(2), Kim SJ(#)(3)(4), Metcalf SA(1)(5), Sweeney MA(1), Wu 
J(1)(6)(7), Xie H(1)(2), Mazza GL(8)(9), Valente MJ(10), MacKinnon DP(8), Marsch 
LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, United States.
(3)Department of Health Behavior and Policy, School of Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United States.
(4)Health Communication and Digital Innovation, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United States.
(5)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Media and Design, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United 
States.
(8)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.
(9)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, 
United States.
(10)Center for Children and Families, Department of Psychology, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Self-regulation refers to a person's ability to manage their 
cognitive, emotional, and behavioral processes to achieve long-term goals. Most 
prior research has examined self-regulation at the individual level; however, 
individual-level assessments do not allow the examination of dynamic patterns of 
intraindividual variability in self-regulation and thus cannot aid in 
understanding potential malleable processes of self-regulation that may occur in 
response to the daily environment.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to develop a brief, psychometrically sound momentary 
self-regulation scale that can be practically administered through participants' 
mobile devices at a momentary level.
METHODS: This study was conducted in 2 phases. In the first phase, in a sample 
of 522 adults collected as part of a larger self-regulation project, we examined 
23 previously validated assessments of self-regulation containing 594 items in 
total to evaluate the underlying structure of self-regulation via exploratory 
and confirmatory factor analyses. We then selected 20 trait-level items to be 
carried forward to the second phase. In the second phase, we converted each item 
into a momentary question and piloted the momentary items in a sample of 53 
adults over 14 days. Using the results from the momentary pilot study, we 
explored the psychometric properties of the items and assessed their underlying 
structure. We then proposed a set of subscale and total score calculations.
RESULTS: In the first phase, the selected individual-level items appeared to 
measure 4 factors of self-regulation. The factors identified were perseverance, 
sensation seeking, emotion regulation, and mindfulness. In the second phase of 
the ecological momentary assessment pilot, the selected items demonstrated 
strong construct validity as well as predictive validity for health risk 
behaviors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide preliminary evidence for a 12-item momentary 
self-regulation scale comprising 4 subscales designed to capture self-regulatory 
dynamics at the momentary level.

©Emily A Scherer, Sunny Jung Kim, Stephen A Metcalf, Mary Ann Sweeney, Jialing 
Wu, Haiyi Xie, Gina L Mazza, Matthew J Valente, David P MacKinnon, Lisa A 
Marsch. Originally published in JMIR Mental Health (https://mental.jmir.org), 
10.05.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/35273
PMCID: PMC9131140
PMID: 35536605

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


39. Ind Health. 2021;59(2):86-98. doi: 10.2486/indhealth.2020-0191.

My job impacts my sleep: signs and symptoms of insomnia among healthcare 
workers.

Lee S(1), Gonzalez BD(2), Small BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Aging Studies, University of South Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Health Outcomes and Behavior, Moffitt Cancer Center, USA.

Potential insomnia in healthcare workers is a public health concern as it may 
degrade the quality of patient care. We examined the prevalence of insomnia 
symptoms in healthcare workers and their perceived need for a sleep 
intervention. Participants were 62 nurses working full-time at a U.S. hospital. 
These nurses were asked about background characteristics, perceived stress, 
sleep concerns, and need for a sleep intervention. They also participated in 
14-d ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and actigraphy sleep study. A 
qualitative analysis showed that the majority (92%) of participants reported at 
least one sleep concern with insomnia-related concerns being most prevalent 
(68%). Quantitative analyses indicated that those with insomnia-related concerns 
had higher perceived stress overall and lower EMA sleep sufficiency and sleep 
quality. Moreover, participants with insomnia concerns had shorter 
actigraphy-measured nap duration prior to non-workdays than those without. 
Nearly all (95%) expressed interest in participating in a sleep intervention; an 
online format and mindfulness contents were most preferred. Our results suggest 
a high prevalence of insomnia symptoms and a high interest in a sleep 
intervention in nurses. Information obtained from this study could be used to 
deliver a tailored sleep intervention for nurses whose role in public health is 
essential.

DOI: 10.2486/indhealth.2020-0191
PMCID: PMC8010164
PMID: 33762517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Depress Anxiety. 2017 Jun;34(6):481-493. doi: 10.1002/da.22647. Epub 2017 May 
23.

The experience sampling method as an mHealth tool to support self-monitoring, 
self-insight, and personalized health care in clinical practice.

van Os J(1)(2), Verhagen S(1), Marsman A(1), Peeters F(1), Bak M(1), Marcelis 
M(1)(3), Drukker M(1), Reininghaus U(1)(4), Jacobs N(1)(3), Lataster T(1), 
Simons C(1)(5); ESM-MERGE Investigators PhD(1); Lousberg R(1), Gülöksüz S(1)(6), 
Leue C(1), Groot PC(1), Viechtbauer W(1), Delespaul P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, King's Health 
Partners, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Open University of the 
Netherlands, Heerlen, The Netherlands.
(4)Centre for Epidemiology and Public Health, Health Service and Population 
Research Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London, London, UK.
(5)GGzE, Institute for Mental Health Care Eindhoven and De Kempen, Eindhoven, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: The experience sampling method (ESM) builds an intensive time series 
of experiences and contexts in the flow of daily life, typically consisting of 
around 70 reports, collected at 8-10 random time points per day over a period of 
up to 10 days.
METHODS: With the advent of widespread smartphone use, ESM can be used in 
routine clinical practice. Multiple examples of ESM data collections across 
different patient groups and settings are shown and discussed, varying from an 
ESM evaluation of a 6-week randomized trial of mindfulness, to a twin study on 
emotion dynamics in daily life.
RESULTS: Research shows that ESM-based self-monitoring and feedback can enhance 
resilience by strengthening the capacity to use natural rewards. Personalized 
trajectories of starting or stopping medication can be more easily initiated and 
predicted if sensitive feedback data are available in real time. In addition, 
personalized trajectories of symptoms, cognitive abilities, symptoms impacting 
on other symptoms, the capacity of the dynamic system of mental health to 
"bounce back" from disturbance, and patterns of environmental reactivity yield 
uniquely personal data to support shared decision making and prediction in 
clinical practice. Finally, ESM makes it possible to develop insight into 
previous implicit patterns of thought, experience, and behavior, particularly if 
rapid personalized feedback is available.
CONCLUSIONS: ESM enhances clinical practice and research. It is empowering, 
providing co-ownership of the process of diagnosis, treatment evaluation, and 
routine outcome measurement. Blended care, based on a mix of face-to-face and 
ESM-based outside-the-office treatment, may reduce costs and improve outcomes.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/da.22647
PMID: 28544391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Behav Res Ther. 2025 Jan;184:104654. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2024.104654. Epub 2024 
Nov 19.

Translational assessment of anhedonia components: Significant associations 
between reward anticipation measured via behavioural task performance, daily 
smartphone reports, and general anhedonia questionnaires.

Parsons CE(1), Tollånes L(1), Cella M(2), Hirsch CR(2), Young KS(3).

Author information:
(1)Interacting Minds Center, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, 
King's College London, London, SE5 8AF, UK; South London and Maudsley NHS 
Foundation Trust, UK.
(3)NIHR Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, King's College London, UK; Social, 
Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
& Neuroscience, King's College London, London, SE5 8AF, UK.

Anhedonia, a reduction in pleasure in previously enjoyed activities, is a 
hallmark feature of depression and is also of transdiagnostic relevance to many 
psychiatric disorders. Treatment and measurement of anhedonia are significant 
challenges. We examine anhedonia components, combining experimental training, 
with multimodal anhedonia assessment, comprising standard questionnaire 
instruments, a widely-used behavioural task, and daily reports of reward 
experience. Seventy-eight adults (74.4% female) completed both positive and 
negative cognitive bias modification training, a laboratory-based behavioural 
measure of reward anticipation and motivation, the Effort-Expenditure for Reward 
Task (EEfRT), and seven days of experience sampling via their smartphones. We 
found no evidence that cognitive bias modification training affected choices to 
engage in the high-effort trials on the EEfRT task, theorised to reflect reward 
anticipation. We also did not find the expected associations between baseline 
measures of anhedonia and reward sensitivity and response to training. 
Behavioural performance on the low probability EEfRT trials indicating higher 
reward anticipation was significantly associated with daily reports of 
anticipated reward. Daily reported reward anticipation and consumption were also 
associated with the questionnaire measure of anhedonia. Our findings demonstrate 
that traditional anhedonia questionnaire measures, and a laboratory-based 
measure of an anhedonia component, can translate to reported experiences of 
reward in real-world contexts. We demonstrate the specificity of associations 
between the laboratory measure, designed to measure reward anticipation and not 
consumption, and real-world reports.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2024.104654
PMID: 39616661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


42. J Behav Med. 2018 Apr;41(2):160-173. doi: 10.1007/s10865-017-9884-5. Epub 2017 
Sep 16.

Testing a mobile mindful eating intervention targeting craving-related eating: 
feasibility and proof of concept.

Mason AE(1)(2), Jhaveri K(3), Cohn M(4), Brewer JA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California - San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. ashley.mason@ucsf.edu.
(2)Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California - San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. ashley.mason@ucsf.edu.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(4)Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California - San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

Theoretically driven smartphone-delivered behavioral interventions that target 
mechanisms underlying eating behavior are lacking. In this study, we 
administered a 28-day self-paced smartphone-delivered intervention rooted in an 
operant conditioning theoretical framework that targets craving-related eating 
using mindful eating practices. At pre-intervention and 1-month 
post-intervention, we assessed food cravings among adult overweight or obese 
women (N = 104; M age = 46.2 ± 14.1 years; M BMI = 31.5 ± 4.5) using ecological 
momentary assessment via text message (SMS), self-reported eating behavior 
(e.g., trait food craving), and in-person weight. Seventy-eight participants 
(75.0%) completed the intervention within 7 months ('all completers'), and of 
these, 64 completed the intervention within 3 months ('timely completers'). 
Participants experienced significant reductions in craving-related eating 
(40.21% reduction; p < .001) and self-reported overeating behavior (trait food 
craving, p < .001; other measures ps < .01). Reductions in trait food craving 
were significantly correlated with weight loss for timely completers (r = .30, 
p = .020), this pattern of results was also evident in all completers (r = .22, 
p = .065). Taken together, results suggest that smartphone-delivered mindful 
eating training targeting craving-related eating may (1) target behavior that 
impacts a relative metabolic pathway, and (2) represent a low-burden and highly 
disseminable method to reduce problematic overeating among overweight 
individuals. ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT02694731.

DOI: 10.1007/s10865-017-9884-5
PMCID: PMC5844778
PMID: 28918456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: JB owns stock in Claritas 
MindSciences, the company that produced the app. AM, KJ, and MC declare no 
conflicts of interest.


43. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2022 Apr 14;10(4):e33938. doi: 10.2196/33938.

Low- and High-Intensity Physical Activity Among People with HIV: Multilevel 
Modeling Analysis Using Sensor- and Survey-Based Predictors.

Cook P(1), Jankowski C(1), Erlandson KM(2), Reeder B(3), Starr W(2), Flynn Makic 
MB(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States.
(3)Sinclair School of Nursing, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: High-intensity physical activity improves the health of people with 
HIV. Even when people have good intentions to engage in physical activity, they 
often find it difficult to maintain physical activity behavior in the long term. 
Two Minds Theory is a neurocognitive model that explains gaps between people's 
intentions and behaviors based on the operations of 2 independent mental 
systems. This model predicts that everyday experiences will affect physical 
activity and that factors outside people's awareness, such as sleep and stress, 
can have particularly strong effects on physical activity behaviors.
OBJECTIVE: We designed this study to test the effects of daily experiences on 
physical activity among people with HIV, including measures of people's 
conscious experiences using daily electronic surveys and measures of 
nonconscious influences using sensor devices.
METHODS: In this study, 55 people with HIV wore a Fitbit Alta for 30 days to 
monitor their physical activity, sleep, and heart rate variability (HRV) as a 
physiological indicator of stress. Participants also used their smartphones to 
complete daily electronic surveys for the same 30 days about fatigue, 
self-efficacy, mood, stress, coping, motivation, and barriers to self-care. 
Time-lagged, within-person, multilevel models were used to identify the best 
prospective predictors of physical activity, considering the daily survey 
responses of people with HIV and sensor data as predictors of their physical 
activity the following day. We also tested baseline surveys as predictors of 
physical activity for comparison with daily variables.
RESULTS: Different people had different average levels of physical activity; 
however, physical activity also varied substantially from day to day, and daily 
measures were more predictive than baseline surveys. This suggests a chance to 
intervene based on day-to-day variations in physical activity. High-intensity 
physical activity was more likely when people with HIV reported less subjective 
fatigue on the prior day (r=-0.48) but was unrelated to actual sleep based on 
objective sensor data. High-intensity physical activity was also predicted by 
higher HRV (r=0.56), indicating less stress, lower HIV-related stigma (r=-0.21), 
fewer barriers to self-care (r=-0.34), and less approach coping (r=-0.34). 
Similar variables predicted lower-level physical activity measured based on the 
number of steps per day of people with HIV.
CONCLUSIONS: Some predictors of physical activity, such as HRV, were only 
apparent based on sensor data, whereas others, such as fatigue, could be 
measured via self-report. Findings about coping were unexpected; however, other 
findings were in line with the literature. This study extends our prior 
knowledge on physical activity by demonstrating a prospective effect of everyday 
experiences on physical activity behavior, which is in line with the predictions 
of Two Minds Theory. Clinicians can support the physical activity of people with 
HIV by helping their patients reduce their daily stress, fatigue, and barriers 
to self-care.

©Paul Cook, Catherine Jankowski, Kristine M Erlandson, Blaine Reeder, Whitney 
Starr, Mary Beth Flynn Makic. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth 
(https://mhealth.jmir.org), 14.04.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/33938
PMCID: PMC9135322
PMID: 35436236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


44. Appetite. 2016 Aug 1;103:176-183. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2016.04.014. Epub 2016 
Apr 13.

Mindful decision making and inhibitory control training as complementary means 
to decrease snack consumption.

Forman EM(1), Shaw JA(2), Goldstein SP(2), Butryn ML(2), Martin LM(2), Meiran 
N(3), Crosby RD(4), Manasse SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St., Department of Psychology, Philadelphia, 
PA, 19104, United States. Electronic address: evan.forman@drexel.edu.
(2)Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St., Department of Psychology, Philadelphia, 
PA, 19104, United States.
(3)Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 8410501, Israel.
(4)Neuropsychiatric Research Institute/University of North Dakota, 700 1st Ave 
S, Fargo, ND, 58103, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Obesity is largely attributable to excess caloric intake, in 
particular from "junk" foods, including salty snack foods. Evidence suggests 
that neurobiological preferences to consume highly hedonic foods translate (via 
implicit processes) into poor eating choices, unless overturned by inhibitory 
mechanisms or interrupted by explicit processes. The primary aim of the current 
study was to test the independent and combinatory effects of a computerized 
inhibitory control training (ICT) and a mindful decision-making training (MDT) 
designed to facilitate de-automatization.
METHODS: We randomized 119 habitual salty snack food eaters to one of four 
short, training conditions: MDT, ICT, both MDT and ICT, or neither (i.e., 
psychoeducation). For 7 days prior to the intervention and 7 days following the 
intervention, participants reported on their salty snack food consumption 2 
times per day, on 3 portions of their days, using a smartphone-based ecological 
momentary assessment system. Susceptibility to emotional eating cues was 
measured at baseline.
RESULTS: Results indicated that the effect of MDT was consistent across levels 
of trait emotional eating, whereas the benefit of ICT was apparent only at lower 
levels of emotional eating. No synergistic effect of MDT and ICT was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide qualified support for the efficacy of both 
types of training for decreasing hedonically-motivated eating. Moderation 
effects suggest that those who eat snack foods for reasons unconnected to 
affective experiences (i.e., lower in emotional eating) may derive benefit from 
a combination of ICT and MDT. Future research should investigate the additive 
benefit of de-automization training to standard weight loss interventions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.appet.2016.04.014
PMID: 27083129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. JMIR Form Res. 2025 Jul 24;9:e69556. doi: 10.2196/69556.

Just-in-Time Delivery of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy-Based Exercises: 
Single-Case Experimental Design With Random Multiple Baselines.

Oba T(1), Takano K(1), Sugawara D(2), Kimura K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Informatics and Interaction Research Institute, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, 305-8566, 
Japan, 81 50-3522-4500.
(2)Institute of Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs) are a promising 
approach in mental health care given the potential scalability (ie, 
interventions are offered automatically and remotely) and preciseness (ie, the 
right interventions are offered at the right moments). Typically, a smartphone 
app is programmed to assess users' psychological states in daily life; when a 
particular state is detected, the app prompts users to engage in specific 
behaviors. Conceptually, JITAIs hold significant potential for precision health, 
although there is currently limited evidence in the literature.
OBJECTIVE: We implemented this scheme as a smartphone intervention for daily 
stress management, based on cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and evaluated 
its feasibility and efficacy using a single-case experimental design.
METHODS: A total of 8 Japanese adults (community sample: 4 women; mean 37.6, SD 
13.1 y) were recruited. An AB phase design with multiple random baselines was 
used, where "A" represents the baseline phase and "B" represents the 
intervention phase. Throughout the study period (28 d), participants were 
prompted to indicate their momentary levels of stress (range 0-100) using a 
smartphone thrice a day. The baseline phase duration was randomly varied among 
participants, lasting between 7 and 14 days. The remaining period was used as 
the intervention phase (14-21 d), where 6 CBT-based exercises (ie, breath 
control, mindfulness, relaxation, self-talk, cognitive defusion, and cognitive 
restructuring) were offered depending on the reported levels of stress.
RESULTS: Approximately 70% (6/8) of the participants perceived the intervention 
to be useful and helpful. A randomization test detected a statistically 
significant decrease in reported stress levels after the intervention began 
(P=.005), though this effect was less pronounced when analyzed individually for 
each participant. Multilevel model analysis detected a significant acute 
reduction in the momentary level of stress right after completing a CBT-based 
exercise (pre-exercise: mean 47.98, SD 21.65; post exercise: mean 42.13, SD 
19.88; P=.03; Cohen dz=0.58). Also, a significant reduction in depressive 
rumination was observed in the postintervention assessment (preintervention: 
mean 13.00, SD 3.21; post intervention: mean 9.25, SD 2.60; P=.01, Cohen 
dz=1.17).
CONCLUSIONS: The intervention was feasible and effective in reducing subjective 
stress (and rumination) in the study sample. The small sample size and the 
nonclinical nature of the sample may limit the generalizability and implications 
of the study findings for clinical practice. More evidence should be collected 
to draw solid conclusions for technical and technological as well as clinical 
aspects of mobile interventions. Accumulating exemplars with different 
implementations will clarify how a JITAI can be designed and developed on a 
mobile platform and how the program can be delivered in the prevention and 
treatment of mental ill health.

© Takeyuki Oba, Keisuke Takano, Daichi Sugawara, Kenta Kimura. Originally 
published in JMIR Formative Research (https://formative.jmir.org).

DOI: 10.2196/69556
PMCID: PMC12288703
PMID: 40705402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


46. J Med Internet Res. 2025 Jul 7;27:e56086. doi: 10.2196/56086.

Scalable Precision Psychiatry With an Objective Measure of Psychological Stress: 
Prospective Real-World Study.

Wang H(1), Farb N(2)(3), Saab B(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Mobio Interactive Pte Ltd, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychological Clinical Sciences, University of Toronto 
Scarborough, Ontario, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Before meaningful progress toward precision psychiatry is possible, 
objective (unbiased) assessment of patient mental well-being must be validated 
and adopted broadly.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to compare the fidelity of a precision psychiatry 
therapy recommendation algorithm when trained with an objective quantification 
of psychological stress versus subjective ecological momentary assessments 
(EMAs) of stress and mood.
METHODS: From 2786 unique individuals engaging between March 2015 and December 
2022 in English language psychotherapy sessions and providing pre- and 
postsession self-report and facial biometric data via a mobile health platform 
(Mobio Interactive Pte Ltd, Singapore), analysis was conducted on 67 "super 
users" that completed a minimum of 28 sessions with all pre- and postsession 
measures. The platform used has previously demonstrated reduced psychiatric 
symptom severity and improved overall mental well-being. Psychotherapy 
recordings ("sessions") within the platform, available asynchronously and on 
demand, span mindfulness, meditation, cognitive behavioral therapy, 
client-centered therapy, music therapy, and self-hypnosis. The platform also has 
the unusual ability to rapidly assess mental well-being without bias via an 
easy-to-use objective measure of psychological stress derived from artificial 
intelligence-based analysis of facial biomarkers (objective stress level [OSL]). 
In tandem with the objective measure, EMAs obtain self-reported values of stress 
(SRS) and mood (SRM). ∆OSL, ∆SRS, and ∆SRM (with delta referring to the 
presession subtracted from the postsession measurement) were used to 
independently train a therapy recommendation algorithm designed to predict what 
future sessions would prove most efficacious for each individual. Algorithm 
predictions were compared against the efficacy of the individual's self-selected 
sessions.
RESULTS: The objective measure of psychological stress provided a differentiated 
delta for the measurement of therapeutic efficacy compared to the 2 EMA deltas, 
as shown by clear divergence in ∆OSL vs ∆SRS or ∆SRM (r<0.03), while the EMA 
deltas showed significant convergence (r=0.53, P<.01). The recommendation 
algorithm selected increasingly efficacious therapy sessions as a function of 
training data when trained with either ∆OSL (F1,16=5.37, P=.03) or ∆SRM data 
(F1,16=3.69, P<.05). However, the sequential improvement in prediction efficacy 
only surpassed the efficacy of self-selected therapy when the algorithm was 
trained using objective data (P<.01). Training the algorithm with EMA data 
showed potential trends that did not reach significance (∆SRS: P=.09; ∆SRM: 
P=.12). As a final insight, self-selected therapy sessions were overrepresented 
among the algorithmically recommended sessions, an effect most pronounced when 
the algorithm was trained with ∆OSL data (F1,14=30.94, P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These prospective data demonstrate that a rapid, scalable, and 
objective measure of psychological stress, in combination with a robust 
recommendation algorithm, can autonomously identify clinically meaningful 
therapy for individuals. More broadly, this work illustrates the potential for 
objective data on mental well-being to improve precision psychiatry and the 
capacity for mental health care professionals to match global demand.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT06265909; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT06265909.

©Helena Wang, Norman Farb, Bechara Saab. Originally published in the Journal of 
Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 07.07.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/56086
PMCID: PMC12280831
PMID: 40622759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: HW, NF, and BS are, 
respectively, a staff cognitive neuroscientist, founding advisor, and chief 
scientist and CEO of Mobio Interactive Pte Ltd, with each owning 0%, ≈1%, and 
≈20% of the company at the time of manuscript submission. NF and BS did not 
directly contribute to, or have direct influence over, data collection or 
analysis.


47. BMJ Open. 2022 Feb 2;12(2):e050088. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050088.

Evaluation of a stand-alone mobile mindfulness app in people experiencing 
infertility: the protocol for an exploratory randomised controlled trial 
(MoMiFer-RCT).

Boedt T(1)(2), Willaert N(3), Lie Fong S(4)(5), Dancet E(4)(5), Spiessens 
C(4)(5), Raes F(2)(3), Matthys C(6)(7), Van der Gucht K(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium 
tessy.boedt@kuleuven.be.
(2)Leuven Mindfulness Centre, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Leuven University Fertility Centre, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven UZ Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Clinical Nutrition, Katholieke Universiteit 
Leuven UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Infertility and its treatment bring a considerable emotional 
burden. Increasing evidence demonstrates the effectiveness of 
smartphone-delivered mindfulness apps for reducing symptoms of emotional 
distress in both clinical and non-clinical populations. Evidence on this topic 
in women, men and couples experiencing infertility is currently 
under-represented. The aim of the MoMiFer study is, therefore, to investigate 
the efficacy of a stand-alone mobile mindfulness app on symptoms of emotional 
distress and fertility-related quality of life in people experiencing 
infertility.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This study is an exploratory randomised controlled trial 
(RCT) with open enrollment. The primary outcomes are symptoms of emotional 
distress and fertility-related quality of life. Secondary outcomes are 
mindfulness skills, repetitive negative thinking, self-compassion, user-rated 
quality of the stand-alone mobile mindfulness app and use of the app. Experience 
sampling method and standardised self-report questionnaires are combined within 
a repeated measures design to measure the effects of the stand-alone mobile 
mindfulness app on the primary and secondary outcomes, apart from the use of the 
app. The latter will be evaluated through app tracking. People, including women, 
men and couples, experiencing infertility (n=60) will be randomised to an 
intervention group receiving the stand-alone mobile mindfulness app for 3 months 
or a wait-list control group. The app follows the format and content of 
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction. Data will be collected at baseline, at 1.5 
months and 3 months after randomisation. Analysis will be according to intention 
to treat and based on general linear modelling and multilevel mixed-effects 
modelling.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This study received approval from the Medical Ethical 
Committee of the Leuven University Hospital (Belgium). The findings of this 
exploratory RCT will be disseminated through presentations at public lectures, 
scientific institutions and meetings, and through peer-reviewed scientific 
articles.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04143828.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050088
PMCID: PMC8811542
PMID: 35110309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: KVdG and FR are founders 
and members of the managing committee of the Leuven Mindfulness Centre Fund. FR 
and KVdG receive payments for workshops and presentations related to 
mindfulness.


48. Behav Sci (Basel). 2023 Jan 30;13(2):117. doi: 10.3390/bs13020117.

Self-Consciousness and Self-Awareness: Associations between Stable and 
Transitory Levels of Evidence.

Majolo M(1), Gomes WB(1), DeCastro TG(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre 90035-003, Brazil.

The theory of objective self-awareness predicts the assessment of stable or 
dispositional self-consciousness and transitory or situational self-awareness. 
The aim of the present research was to investigate potential associations 
between patterns of experiential self-description to scores on self-report 
measures of dispositional self-consciousness. A total of 64 Brazilian volunteers 
(Mage = 29.7, SD = 8.79, 64.1% female) responded to the Revised 
Self-Consciousness Scale, the Philadelphia Mindfulness Scale, and the 
Rumination-Reflection Questionnaire before participating in an experience 
sampling protocol. The protocol consisted of random daily requests for up to 
four self-description experiences across seven consecutive days. Participants 
recorded audio messages on their mobile phones in reply to each request 
describing their current experience. Reports were analyzed through a reflexive 
thematic analysis that produced twenty sub-themes accounting for descriptive 
markers of experience. Based on those descriptive markers, the qualitative data 
were then transformed into quantitative data for the situational self-awareness 
indexes. Evidence of association between self-consciousness and self-awareness 
was stronger for the awareness subscale in a positive correlation with affective 
situational self-awareness and in a negative correlation with mental 
representational transitory self-awareness. Although relational evidence has 
been provided, the data reinforced the theoretical distinction between 
self-consciousness and self-awareness.

DOI: 10.3390/bs13020117
PMCID: PMC9952303
PMID: 36829345

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


49. Front Psychiatry. 2024 May 8;15:1335105. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1335105. 
eCollection 2024.

Evaluating the effectiveness of a mobile app-based self-guided psychological 
interventions to reduce relapse in substance use disorder: protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial.

Redeł A(1)(2), Binkowska AA(1)(3), Obarska K(1)(4), Marcowski P(1), Szymczak 
K(1)(5), Lewczuk K(1)(6), Solich K(1), Banaszak M(1)(7), Woronowicz B(1)(8), 
Nowicka M(1), Skorko M(1)(4), Gola M(1)(4), Bielecki M(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)PredictWatch, Białystok, Poland.
(2)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Institute of Psychology, Humanitas University, Sosnowiec, Poland.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University, Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Institute of Psychology, Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University in Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Monar Association, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Consulting Center Akmed, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Institute of Psychology, SWPS University, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Substance Use Disorder (SUD) persists as a significant public health 
challenge worldwide, with an estimated prevalence of approximately 10-15% across 
the global populace. This condition is characterized by a notably high risk of 
lapses and relapses, even subsequent to treatment interventions. Mobile health 
interventions, owing to their widespread accessibility, emerge as a promising 
approach to diminish the risk of relapse post-treatment and to broaden the scope 
of care, especially in regions with a scarcity of trained medical professionals.
METHOD: This study is designed to assess the effectiveness of mobile 
interventions in mitigating cravings and preventing lapses among individuals 
diagnosed with SUD. Employing a two-armed, randomized controlled trial 
framework, the study will evaluate a self-administered psychological 
intervention delivered through a mobile application, Nałogometr 2.0. Over a 
period of three months, participants will engage with intervention modules that 
primarily incorporate mindfulness techniques and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
(CBT) principles. Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) will be utilized to 
gather longitudinal data on a range of variables that are indicative of craving 
intensity and the risk of lapse. In addition to this, a monthly-administered 
battery of questionnaires will be employed to gauge the severity of substance 
dependence, as well as to measure levels of anxiety, depression, and overall 
life satisfaction.
RESULTS: Results will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: https://clinicaltrials.gov/, identifier 
[NCT05730504].

Copyright © 2024 Redeł, Binkowska, Obarska, Marcowski, Szymczak, Lewczuk, 
Solich, Banaszak, Woronowicz, Nowicka, Skorko, Gola and Bielecki.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1335105
PMCID: PMC11113013
PMID: 38784165

Conflict of interest statement: AR, AB, KO, PM, KSz, KL, KSo, MB, BW, MN, MS, 
MBi, and MG were employed by the company PredictWatch.


50. J Sleep Res. 2022 Aug;31(4):e13533. doi: 10.1111/jsr.13533. Epub 2021 Dec 8.

Sleep quality is associated with emotion experience and adaptive regulation of 
positive emotion: An experience sampling study.

Parsons CE(1), Schofield B(2)(3), Batziou SE(4), Ward C(4), Young KS(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Interacting Minds Center, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Experimental and Neurocognitive Psychology, The Free University 
of Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)NIHR Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, King's College London, London, UK.

Poor sleep patterns have been strongly linked to disrupted emotional 
experiences. Emotion regulation, defined as the capacity to manage one's own 
emotional responses, comprises strategies to increase, maintain, or decrease the 
intensity, duration, and trajectory of positive and negative emotions. Poor 
sleep has been identified as a risk factor for emotional dysregulation, but most 
of the focus has been on negative emotion regulation. We therefore asked whether 
natural variations in sleep are associated with the experience and regulation of 
both positive and negative emotion. Young adults, aged between 18-24 years 
(N = 101), completed 7 days of ecological momentary assessments using a 
smartphone application. Duration and quality of the previous night's sleep was 
reported each morning. Levels of positive and negative emotions, and strategies 
used to regulate emotions, were measured at pseudorandom timepoints four times a 
day. Multilevel modelling indicated that higher self-reported sleep quality was 
significantly associated with increased intensity and duration of positive 
emotion, and decreased intensity of negative emotion. There were no 
statistically significant associations between sleep duration and emotion 
intensity or duration. Sleep quality, and not sleep duration, was also 
associated with the reported use of positive emotion regulation strategies. For 
negative emotion regulation strategy use, we found no associations with sleep 
quality or duration. Naturally occurring fluctuations in daily sleep quality may 
be important for the experience and regulation of positive emotion in young 
adults. These findings emphasise the need to examine both positive and negative 
emotion, and emotion regulation to understand the links between sleep and mood.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Sleep Research published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of European Sleep Research Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jsr.13533
PMID: 35896512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Appl Psychol Health Well Being. 2025 Jun;17(3):e70037. doi: 10.1111/aphw.70037.

Who benefits from mobile health interventions? A dynamical systems analysis of 
psychological well-being in early adults.

Heshmati S(1), Muth C(2), Li Y(3), Roeser RW(3), Smyth JM(4), Vandekerckhove 
J(5), Chow SM(3), Oravecz Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, USA.
(2)Westhampton Family Psychologists, Richmond, Virginia, USA.
(3)Human Development and Family Studies, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.
(5)Cognitive Science, University of California, Irvine, USA.

Research shows that skills for improving Psychological Well-Being (PWB) may be 
learned through PWB interventions; however, the dynamic mechanisms underlying 
this learning process are not well understood. Using an Ecological Momentary 
Intervention (EMI) design, we conducted an 8-week Randomized Controlled Trial 
(N = 160; aged 18-22 years), implemented in a mobile Health (mHealth) platform 
to characterize these dynamical mechanisms. College-attending early adults were 
randomized to three groups: an active control group (N = 55); an intervention 
group (N = 51) with positive practices intervention; and a second intervention 
group (N = 54) with positive practices and meditation intervention. The mHealth 
implementation allowed us to introduce the interventions in participants' daily 
lives while also assessing their PWB (in terms of positive emotions and 
relationship quality) several times a day. We used a Bayesian process model to 
analyze changes in PWB in terms of the underlying dynamical characteristics of 
change. Findings suggested that the mobile assessment tool itself may have 
longitudinally improved college-attending early adults' PWB, as evidenced by 
instances of directional changes in dynamic characteristics (increased 
within-person mean levels, decreased intra-individual variability, and increased 
regulation) of PWB measures. Moderation analysis also revealed that people who 
were low on negative affect improved the most in terms of their mean levels of 
positive emotions and relationship quality.

© 2025 The Author(s). Applied Psychology: Health and Well‐Being published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of International Association of Applied 
Psychology.

DOI: 10.1111/aphw.70037
PMCID: PMC12122108
PMID: 40441271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors confirm that they do not have any 
conflict of interest to report with regards to this research study


52. Early Child Educ J. 2024 Feb;52(2):243-257. doi: 10.1007/s10643-022-01416-0. 
Epub 2022 Nov 29.

The Effects of a Relationship-Focused Professional Development Intervention on 
Infant and Toddler Teachers' Mindfulness-Based Strategies for Coping.

Brophy-Herb HE(1), Stacks AM(2), Frosch C(3), Brincks AM(1), Cook JL(1), 
Vallotton CD(1), Perkins HA(1), Kim LE(1), Carson R(4), Muzik M(5)(6), Rosenblum 
K(5)(6), Jennings PA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Michigan State 
University, 552 W. Circle Drive, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(2)Merrill-Palmer Skillman Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Auburn University, 
Auburn, AL, USA.
(4)PlayCore, Greely, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(7)Curry School of Education and Human Development, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Teaching is a demanding profession with teachers of very young children 
reporting high rates of stress and exhaustion. We tested the effects of a 
relationship-focused professional development intervention designed to enhance 
teachers' use of mindfulness-based strategies to support coping on trajectories 
of teachers' stress, exhaustion (emotional, physical, and mental), and coping. 
Infant and toddler teachers (N = 81) from Early Head Start (EHS) or EHS 
childcare partnerships (CCP) were randomized to the intervention or usual care 
control condition. Using ecological momentary assessment, teachers completed 
twice-weekly reports of stress, exhaustion, coping, and coping strategy 
effectiveness via smartphones for 40 weeks. Multilevel linear regression 
modeling, accounting for within-person repeated measures, showed no intervention 
effects on stress and exhaustion trajectories. Teachers in the intervention 
reported increased use of mindfulness-based strategies for coping over time as 
compared to the control group, although frequency of use peaked and then 
declined. While perceptions of stress and exhaustion did not change, teachers' 
increased use of mindfulness-based strategies suggests improvements in how 
teachers managed stress and exhaustion; however, the decline in use of coping 
suggests the need for ongoing support within the workplace.

DOI: 10.1007/s10643-022-01416-0
PMCID: PMC11290201
PMID: 39092205

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors have no 
competing interests to disclose that are relevant to the content of this 
article.


53. Emotion. 2019 Mar;19(2):283-291. doi: 10.1037/emo0000440. Epub 2018 Jun 4.

Parsing affective dynamics to identify risk for mood and anxiety disorders.

Heller AS(1), Fox AS(2), Davidson RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology.
(2)Department of Psychology and California National Primate Research Center, 
University of California, Davis.
(3)Department of Psychology and Center for Healthy Minds, University of 
Wisconsin.

Emotional dysregulation is thought to underlie risk for both anxiety and 
depressive disorders. However, despite high rates of comorbidity, anxiety and 
depression are phenotypically different. Apart from nosological differences 
(e.g., worry for anxiety, low mood for depression), it remains unclear how the 
emotional dysregulation inherent in individual differences in trait anxiety and 
depression severity present on a day-to-day basis. One approach that may 
facilitate addressing these questions is to utilize Ecological Momentary 
Assessment (EMA) using mobile phones to parse the temporal dynamics of affective 
experiences into specific parameters. An emerging literature in affective 
science suggests that risk for anxiety and depressive disorders may be 
associated with variation in the mean and instability/variability of emotion. 
Here we examine the extent to which distinct temporal dynamic parameters 
uniquely predict risk for anxiety versus depression. Over 10 days, 105 
individuals rated their current positive and negative affective state several 
times each day. Using two distinct approaches to statistically assess mean and 
instability of positive and negative affect, we found that individual 
differences in trait anxiety was generally associated with increased instability 
of positive and negative affect whereas mean levels of positive and negative 
affect were generally associated with individual differences in depression. 
These data provide evidence that the emotional dysregulation underlying risk for 
mood versus anxiety disorders unfolds in distinct ways and highlights the 
utility in examining affective dynamics to understand psychopathology. (PsycINFO 
Database Record (c) 2019 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/emo0000440
PMCID: PMC6279626
PMID: 29863379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Affect Disord. 2023 Nov 15;341:162-169. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2023.08.093. Epub 
2023 Aug 19.

Reducing alexithymia and increasing interoceptive awareness: A randomized 
controlled trial comparing mindfulness with dyadic socio-emotional app-based 
practice.

Silveira S(1), Godara M(2), Faschinger A(2), Singer T(2).

Author information:
(1)Social Neuroscience Lab, Max Planck Society, Berlin, Germany. Electronic 
address: office@social.mpg.de.
(2)Social Neuroscience Lab, Max Planck Society, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Emotion processing deficits of alexithymia are a transdiagnostic 
risk factor. While such deficits are malleable, the differential efficacy of 
brief scalable digital mental trainings remains understudied.
METHODS: This randomized controlled trial probed the efficacy of 
mindfulness-based (MB) and partner-based socio-emotional Affect Dyad (SE) 
practice, both supported by weekly coaching sessions, in reducing alexithymia in 
285 adult participants. We investigated the predictive role of interoceptive 
awareness assessed a) before and after daily practice, b) in ecological 
momentary assessment (EMA) before and after the intervention, and c) weekly 
during the 10-week intervention.
RESULTS: Both interventions reduced emotion processing difficulties on the 
Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). Similarly, both interventions improved 
interoceptive awareness immediately after daily practice and after the 
intervention period, yet SE outperformed MB training in EMA assessments. 
Further, only Dyad practice led to increases in body listening and 
self-regulatory aspects of the Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive 
Awareness (MAIA) over time, with the latter explaining a decrease in 
alexithymia.
LIMITATIONS: Given the subclinical study sample, findings are limited in their 
generalizability to clinical samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that app-based socio-emotional and 
mindfulness-based practices, supported by online coaching sessions, are 
effective in reducing emotion processing deficits. Dyad training showed 
advantages on some measures of body awareness, which predicted observed changes 
in alexithymia. This highlights the potential of using app-based dyadic 
approaches in the development of emotion awareness and regulation.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2023.08.093
PMID: 37598721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest TS was a 
scientific and curriculum advisor in Humanize from 2021 to 2023. Humanize is a 
start-up that is inspired by TS's mental intervention research as well as her 
ReConnect Masterclasses focusing on dyadic interventions, including the Affect 
Dyad, and will be releasing modified and extended versions of these dyad 
intervention programs on a newly developed commercial digital platform and app. 
These additional offices of TS have all been formally approved by the Max Planck 
Society. All other authors declare no other conflicts of interest.


55. Front Psychiatry. 2023 May 15;14:1143167. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1143167. 
eCollection 2023.

The Craving-Manager smartphone app designed to diagnose substance use/addictive 
disorders, and manage craving and individual predictors of relapse: a study 
protocol for a multicenter randomized controlled trial.

Serre F(1)(2)(3), Moriceau S(1)(2)(3), Donnadieu L(1)(2)(3), Forcier C(1)(2)(3), 
Garnier H(1)(2)(3), Alexandre JM(1)(2)(3), Dupuy L(1)(2), Philip P(1)(2), 
Levavasseur Y(1)(2), De Sevin E(1)(2), Auriacombe M(1)(2)(3); for 
Craving-Manager RCT investigator group.

Author information:
(1)University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)SANPSY, UMR 6033, CNRS, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Pôle Inter-établissement d'Addictologie, CH Ch. Perrens and CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: The rate of individuals with addiction who are currently treated are 
low, and this can be explained by barriers such as stigma, desire to cope alone, 
and difficulty to access treatment. These barriers could be overcome by mobile 
technologies. EMI (Ecological Momentary Intervention) is a treatment procedure 
characterized by the delivery of interventions (messages on smartphones) to 
people in their daily lives. EMI presents opportunities for treatments to be 
available to people during times and in situations when they are most needed. 
Craving is a strong predictor of relapse and a key target for addiction 
treatment. Studies using Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) method have 
revealed that, in daily life, person-specific cues could precipitate craving, 
that in turn, is associated with a higher probability to report substance use 
and relapse in the following hours. Assessment and management of these specific 
situations in daily life could help to decrease addictive use and avoid relapse. 
The Craving-Manager smartphone app has been designed to diagnose addictive 
disorders, and assess and manage craving as well as individual predictors of 
use/relapse. It delivers specific and individualized interventions (counseling 
messages) composed of evidence-based addiction treatments approaches (cognitive 
behavioral therapy and mindfulness). The Craving-Manager app can be used for any 
addiction (substance or behavior). The objective of this protocol is to evaluate 
the efficacy of the Craving-Manager app in decreasing use (of primary 
substance(s)/addictive behavior(s)) over 4 weeks, among individuals on a waiting 
list for outpatient addiction treatment.
METHODS/DESIGN: This multicenter double-blind randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
will compare two parallel groups: experimental group (full interventional 
version of the app, 4 weeks, EMA + EMI), versus control group (restricted 
version of the app, 4 weeks, only EMA). Two hundred and seventy-four 
participants will be recruited in 6 addiction treatment centers in France.
DISCUSSION: This RCT will provide indication on how the Craving-Manager app will 
reduce addictive use (e.g., better craving management, better stimulus control) 
in both substance and behavioral addictions. If its efficacy is confirmed, the 
app could offer the possibility of an easy to use and personalized intervention 
accessible to the greatest number of individuals with addiction.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04732676.

Copyright © 2023 Serre, Moriceau, Donnadieu, Forcier, Garnier, Alexandre, Dupuy, 
Philip, Levavasseur, De Sevin, for Craving-Manager RCT investigator group and 
Auriacombe.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1143167
PMCID: PMC10226427
PMID: 37255691

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


56. Psychol Med. 2025 May 9;55:e144. doi: 10.1017/S0033291725001199.

Smartphone-based text obtained via passive sensing as it relates to direct 
suicide risk assessment.

Ammerman BA(1), Kleiman EM(2), O'Brien C(1), Knorr AC(3), Bell KA(3), Ram N(4), 
Robinson TN(5), Reeves B(6), Jacobucci R(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA.
(4)Departments of Psychology and Communications, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics, Medicine, and Epidemiology and Population Health, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Communications, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(7)Center for Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent research highlights the dynamics of suicide risk, resulting 
in a shift toward real-time methodologies, such as ecological momentary 
assessment (EMA), to improve suicide risk identification. However, EMA's 
reliance on active self-reporting introduces challenges, including participant 
burden and reduced response rates during crises. This study explores the 
potential of Screenomics-a passive digital phenotyping method that captures 
intensive, real-time smartphone screenshots-to detect suicide risk through 
text-based analysis.
METHOD: Seventy-nine participants with past-month suicidal ideation or behavior 
completed daily EMA prompts and provided smartphone data over 28 days, resulting 
in approximately 7.5 million screenshots. Text from screenshots was analyzed 
using a validated dictionary encompassing suicide-related and general risk 
language.
RESULTS: Results indicated significant associations between passive and active 
suicidal ideation and suicide planning with specific language patterns. 
Detection of words related to suicidal thoughts and general risk-related words 
strongly correlated with self-reported suicide risk, with distinct between- and 
within-person effects highlighting the dynamic nature of suicide risk factors.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the feasibility of leveraging smartphone 
text data for real-time suicide risk detection, offering a scalable, low-burden 
alternative to traditional methods. Findings suggest that dynamic, 
individualized monitoring via passive data collection could enhance suicide 
prevention efforts by enabling timely, tailored interventions. Future research 
should refine language models and explore diverse populations to extend the 
generalizability of this innovative approach.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291725001199
PMCID: PMC12094652
PMID: 40340954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


57. JMIR Res Protoc. 2025 Apr 24;14:e71867. doi: 10.2196/71867.

Feasibility Testing a Meditation App for Professionals Working With Youth in the 
Legal System: Protocol for a Hybrid Type 2 Effectiveness-Implementation Pilot 
Randomized Controlled Trial.

Kendall AD(1), Pela E(2), Amonica D(1), Jaworski E(3), Floyd B(4); AIM+ 
Community Advisory Board(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dissemination and Implementation Science, Department of Medicine, 
University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Institute for Health Research and Policy, University of Illinois Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research, University of Illinois Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
(4)School of Public Health, Community Health Sciences, University of Illinois 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(5)See Acknowledgements, .

BACKGROUND: Probation officers and other professionals who work with youth in 
the legal system often experience high chronic workplace stress, which can 
contribute over time to elevations in anxiety, depression, and workplace 
burnout. Emotion dysregulation appears to function as a common mechanism 
underlying these elevations, and growing evidence suggests it can be improved 
with mindfulness meditation. Implemented successfully, app-based meditation 
programs could provide professionals with real-time tools for mitigating the 
effects of chronic workplace stress.
OBJECTIVE: This paper describes the protocol for a hybrid type 2 
effectiveness-implementation pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) of Bodhi 
AIM+, a meditation app adapted with and for professionals who work with youth in 
the legal system. The adaptation process and implementation plan, as well as the 
pilot RCT design, were guided by theoretically driven implementation science 
frameworks. The primary outcome of the pilot RCT is app adherence (ie, ongoing 
app usage per objective analytics data).
METHODS: The RCT will be fully remote. Officers and other professionals who work 
with youth in the legal system (N=50) will be individually randomized to use the 
meditation app or an active control app matched for time and structure. All 
participants will be asked to follow a 30-day path of brief audio- or 
video-guided content and invited to use additional app features as desired. 
In-app analytics will capture the objective usage of each feature. An adaptive 
engagement design will be employed to engage nonusers of both apps, whereby 
analytics data indicating nonuse will trigger additional support (eg, text 
messages promoting engagement). Mental health outcomes and potential moderators 
and covariates will be self-reported at baseline, posttest, and 6 months. 
Participants will also complete 1-week bursts of ecological momentary assessment 
(EMA) at baseline and over the last week of the intervention to capture the 
mechanistic target (ie, emotion regulation) in real time. All participants will 
be invited to complete qualitative posttest interviews. Descriptive statistics 
will be calculated for quantitative data. Qualitative data will be analyzed 
using a combined deductive-inductive approach. The quantitative and qualitative 
data will be incorporated into a mixed methods triangulation design, allowing 
for the evaluation of app adherence and other implementation outcomes as well as 
related barriers and facilitators to implementation.
RESULTS: Enrollment into the trial started in December 2024 and is currently 
underway. Study results are anticipated to be available in 2026.
CONCLUSIONS: Completion of this pilot trial will inform a future, fully powered 
RCT to formally evaluate the effectiveness and implementation of Bodhi AIM+. Its 
use of implementation science methods, coupled with digital technology, 
positions the present study not only to help make meditation tools available to 
an important workforce at scale but also to inform broader efforts at 
implementing and evaluating health apps within workplace settings.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClincialTrials.gov NCT06555172; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06555172.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/71867.

©Ashley D Kendall, Emily Pela, Danielle Amonica, Erin Jaworski, Brenikki Floyd, 
The AIM+ Community Advisory Board. Originally published in JMIR Research 
Protocols (https://www.researchprotocols.org), 24.04.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/71867
PMCID: PMC12062756
PMID: 40273446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


58. JMIR Res Protoc. 2025 Sep 23;14:e74388. doi: 10.2196/74388.

App-Based Smoking Urge Reduction Intervention for Young Adults: Protocol 
Combining a Microrandomized Trial and Conventional Between-Subject Randomized 
Trial.

Thrul J(1)(2)(3), Devkota J(1), Waring JJC(1), Desjardins MR(2)(4)(5), Hamoud 
J(6), Han J(1), Naughton F(7), Zipunnikov V(8), Mendelson T(1), Latkin C(9), 
Epstein D(10), Moran M(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Health, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Centre for Alcohol Policy Research, La Trobe University, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(5)Spatial Science for Public Health Center, Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Department of Medical Statistics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(7)Addiction Research Group, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(9)Department of Health, Behavior and Society, Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(10)Real-World Assessment, Prediction, and Treatment Unit, Intramural Research 
Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, MD, United States.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoking is the leading preventable cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the United States, and young adults have high smoking rates. 
Although most young adult smokers are interested in quitting, they underutilize 
professional cessation support. Smartphones have wide reach and integration into 
young adults' lives, and these devices offer great opportunities to deliver 
cessation interventions by delivering messages suggesting coping strategies "in 
the moment" when smokers need cessation support.
OBJECTIVE: The overall goal of this trial is to evaluate the efficacy of 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and mindfulness or acceptance and commitment 
therapy (ACT) messages for young adults targeted at specific high-risk 
situations for smoking.
METHODS: We will conduct a microrandomized trial (MRT; within-subject 
randomization) to test the efficacy of CBT and mindfulness or ACT compared with 
control messages for reducing smoking urge up to 15 minutes after message 
delivery, nested in a conventional between-subject randomized controlled trial 
(RCT). A conventional between-subject control group of participants who will 
complete ecological momentary assessment (EMA) only without intervention 
messages will allow us to test if messages reduce cigarettes per day at the end 
of treatment, 3-month follow-up, and 6-month follow-up. Among MRT intervention 
group participants, we will explore how message efficacy may be moderated by 
substance co-use (cannabis, alcohol, other drugs) and exposure to specific 
settings (home, work, bars).
RESULTS: As of June 2025, we had enrolled 58 participants of the target sample 
of 160, with 52% (30/58) assigned to the MRT group and 48% (28/58) assigned to 
the EMA-only control.
CONCLUSIONS: Smoking onset is now more common among young adults than 
adolescents, and early cessation substantially reduces morbidity and mortality 
from smoking, making age-appropriate, tailored, and scalable interventions for 
this high-priority population even more important. Results of this trial will 
provide evidence on the efficacy of tailored intervention messages to help young 
adult smokers cope with smoking urges as an integral part of smartphone 
interventions. Findings will inform the field about key principles, strategies, 
and efficacy of situational tailoring of app-based tobacco use urge reduction 
messages.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT05836103; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05836103.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/74388.

©Johannes Thrul, Janardan Devkota, Joseph J C Waring, Michael R Desjardins, 
Josef Hamoud, Jasmin Han, Felix Naughton, Vadim Zipunnikov, Tamar Mendelson, 
Carl Latkin, David Epstein, Meghan Moran. Originally published in JMIR Research 
Protocols (https://www.researchprotocols.org), 23.09.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/74388
PMID: 40987452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nicotine Tob Res. 2020 Mar 16;22(3):324-331. doi: 10.1093/ntr/nty126.

Craving to Quit: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Smartphone App-Based 
Mindfulness Training for Smoking Cessation.

Garrison KA(1), Pal P(2), O'Malley SS(1), Pittman BP(1), Gueorguieva R(1)(3), 
Rojiani R(1), Scheinost D(4), Dallery J(5), Brewer JA(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(2)Department of Medicine and Psychiatry, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, Worcester, MA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT.
(4)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(6)Center for Mindfulness, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA.

INTRODUCTION: Mindfulness training may reduce smoking rates and lessen the 
association between craving and smoking. This trial tested the efficacy of 
mindfulness training via smartphone app to reduce smoking. Experience sampling 
(ES) was used to measure real-time craving, smoking, and mindfulness.
METHODS: A researcher-blind, parallel randomized controlled trial compared the 
efficacy of mobile mindfulness training with experience sampling (MMT-ES; 
Craving to Quit) versus experience sampling only (ES) to (1) increase 1-week 
point-prevalence abstinence rates at 6 months, and (2) lessen the association 
between craving and smoking. A modified intent-to-treat approach was used for 
treatment starters (MMT-ES n = 143; ES n = 182; 72% female, 81% white, age 41 ± 
12 year).
RESULTS: No group difference was found in smoking abstinence at 6 months 
(overall, 11.1%; MMT-ES, 9.8%; ES, 12.1%; χ2(1) = 0.43, p = .51). From baseline 
to 6 months, both groups showed a reduction in cigarettes per day (p < .0001), 
craving strength (p < .0001) and frequency (p < .0001), and an increase in 
mindfulness (p < .05). Using ES data, a craving by group interaction was 
observed (F(1,3785) = 3.71, p = .05) driven by a stronger positive association 
between craving and cigarettes per day for ES (t = 4.96, p < .0001) versus 
MMT-ES (t = 2.03, p = .04). Within MMT-ES, the relationship between craving and 
cigarettes per day decreased as treatment completion increased (F(1,104) = 4.44, 
p = .04).
CONCLUSIONS: Although mindfulness training via smartphone app did not lead to 
reduced smoking rates compared with control, our findings provide preliminary 
evidence that mindfulness training via smartphone app may help lessen the 
association between craving and smoking, an effect that may be meaningful to 
support quitting in the longer term.
IMPLICATIONS: This is the first reported full-scale randomized controlled trial 
of any smartphone app for smoking cessation. Findings provide preliminary 
evidence that smartphone app-based MMT-ES may lessen the association between 
craving and smoking.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT02134509.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ntr/nty126
PMCID: PMC7297096
PMID: 29917096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Contemp Clin Trials Commun. 2024 Jul 26;41:101338. doi: 
10.1016/j.conctc.2024.101338. eCollection 2024 Oct.

A smartphone app-based mindfulness intervention to enhance recovery from 
substance use disorders: Protocol for a pilot feasibility randomized controlled 
trial.

Roos CR(1), Bricker J(2), Kiluk B(1), Trull TJ(3), Bowen S(4), Witkiewitz K(5), 
Kober H(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(2)Fred Hutch Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Pacific University, USA.
(5)Center on Alcohol, Substance Use, and Addiction, Department of Psychology, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Poor long-term recovery outcomes after treatment (e.g., readmission 
to inpatient treatment) are common among individuals with substance use 
disorders (SUDs). In-person mindfulness-based treatments (MBTs) are efficacious 
for SUDs and may improve recovery outcomes. However, existing MBTs for SUD have 
limited public health reach, and thus scalable delivery methods are needed. A 
digitally-delivered MBT for SUDs may hold promise.
METHODS: We recently developed Mindful Journey, a smartphone app-based 
adjunctive MBT for improving long-term recovery outcomes. In this paper, we 
present details on the app and describe the protocol for a single-site pilot 
feasibility randomized controlled trial of Mindful Journey. In this trial, 
individuals (n = 34) in an early phase of outpatient treatment for SUDs will be 
randomized to either treatment-as-usual (TAU) plus Mindful Journey, or TAU only. 
The trial will focus on testing the feasibility (e.g., engagement) and 
acceptability of the app (e.g., perceived usability and helpfulness for 
recovery), as well as feasibility of study procedures (e.g., assessment 
completion). The trial will incorporate ecological momentary assessment before 
and after treatment to assess mechanisms in real-time, including mindfulness, 
craving, difficulties with negative emotion regulation, and savoring. To examine 
the sensitivity to change of outcomes (substance use, substance-related 
problems, and psychological distress) and mechanism variables (noted above), we 
will test within-treatment-condition changes over time.
DISCUSSION: The proposed pilot trial will provide important preliminary data on 
whether Mindful Journey is feasible and acceptable among individuals with SUDs.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT05109507.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conctc.2024.101338
PMCID: PMC11372603
PMID: 39233850

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


61. Emotion. 2019 Feb;19(1):123-131. doi: 10.1037/emo0000406. Epub 2018 Mar 26.

An experience sampling study examining the potential impact of a 
mindfulness-based intervention on emotion differentiation.

Van der Gucht K(1), Dejonckheere E(1), Erbas Y(1), Takano K(1), Vandemoortele 
M(1), Maex E(2), Raes F(1), Kuppens P(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven.
(2)Ziekenhuis Netwerk Antwerpen.

Research has shown that how well people can differentiate between different 
emotional states is an essential requirement for adaptive emotion regulation. 
People with low levels of emotion differentiation tend to be more vulnerable to 
develop emotional disorders. Although we know quite a lot about the correlates 
of emotion differentiation, research on factors or interventions which could 
improve emotion differentiation skills is scarce. Here, we hypothesize, and 
study empirically, whether a mindfulness-based intervention (MBI) may impact the 
differentiation of negative and positive emotions. A within-subjects pre-, 
post-, and follow-up design involving experience sampling was used. At each 
phase participants reported their current emotions and mindfulness skills up to 
40 times across 4 consecutive days using smartphones. Multilevel modeling showed 
a significant improvement in negative emotion differentiation postintervention 
and at 4 months of follow-up, and a significant improvement in positive emotion 
differentiation at 4 months follow-up. The improvement in negative emotion 
differentiation, however, was no longer significant when controlling for levels 
of negative affect. A time-lagged mediation model showed that posttreatment 
changes in mindfulness skills mediated subsequent changes in negative emotion 
differentiation, also when controlling for levels of negative affect. These 
results suggest that MBI is a promising approach to improve people's emotion 
differentiation skills. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2019 APA, all rights 
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/emo0000406
PMID: 29578747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Front Digit Health. 2022 Mar 18;4:798895. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2022.798895. 
eCollection 2022.

Momentary Influences on Self-Regulation in Two Populations With Health Risk 
Behaviors: Adults Who Smoke and Adults Who Are Overweight and Have Binge-Eating 
Disorder.

Scherer EA(1), Metcalf SA(1)(2), Whicker CL(1), Bartels SM(1)(3), Grabinski 
M(1), Kim SJ(4)(5), Sweeney MA(1), Lemley SM(1), Lavoie H(1)(6), Xie H(1), 
Bissett PG(7), Dallery J(8), Kiernan M(9), Lowe MR(10), Onken L(11), Prochaska 
JJ(9), Stoeckel LE(11), Poldrack RA(7), MacKinnon DP(12), Marsch LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth College, Lebanon, NH, United States.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Health Behavior, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Health Behavior and Policy, School of Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United States.
(5)Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United 
States.
(6)Department of Health Education and Behavior, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, United States.
(7)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.
(8)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United 
States.
(9)Stanford Prevention Research Center, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, United States.
(10)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Drexel University, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(11)National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
United States.
(12)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United 
States.

INTRODUCTION: Self-regulation has been implicated in health risk behaviors and 
is a target of many health behavior interventions. Despite most prior research 
focusing on self-regulation as an individual-level trait, we hypothesize that 
self-regulation is a time-varying mechanism of health and risk behavior that may 
be influenced by momentary contexts to a substantial degree. Because most health 
behaviors (e.g., eating, drinking, smoking) occur in the context of everyday 
activities, digital technologies may help us better understand and influence 
these behaviors in real time. Using a momentary self-regulation measure, the 
current study (which was part of a larger multi-year research project on the 
science of behavior change) used ecological momentary assessment (EMA) to assess 
if self-regulation can be engaged and manipulated on a momentary basis in 
naturalistic, non-laboratory settings.
METHODS: This one-arm, open-label exploratory study prospectively collected 
momentary data for 14 days from 104 participants who smoked regularly and 81 
participants who were overweight and had binge-eating disorder. Four times per 
day, participants were queried about momentary self-regulation, emotional state, 
and social and environmental context; recent smoking and exposure to smoking 
cues (smoking sample only); and recent eating, binge eating, and exposure to 
binge-eating cues (binge-eating sample only). This study used a novel, momentary 
self-regulation measure comprised of four subscales: momentary perseverance, 
momentary sensation seeking, momentary self-judgment, and momentary mindfulness. 
Participants were also instructed to engage with Laddr, a mobile application 
that provides evidence-based health behavior change tools via an integrated 
platform. The association between momentary context and momentary 
self-regulation was explored via mixed-effects models. Exploratory assessments 
of whether recent Laddr use (defined as use within 12 h of momentary responses) 
modified the association between momentary context and momentary self-regulation 
were performed via mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: Participants (mean age 35.2; 78% female) in the smoking and 
binge-eating samples contributed a total of 3,233 and 3,481 momentary 
questionnaires, respectively. Momentary self-regulation subscales were 
associated with several momentary contexts, in the combined as well as smoking 
and binge-eating samples. For example, in the combined sample momentary 
perseverance was associated with location, positively associated with positive 
affect, and negatively associated with negative affect, stress, and tiredness. 
In the smoking sample, momentary perseverance was positively associated with 
momentary difficulty in accessing cigarettes, caffeine intake, and momentary 
restraint in smoking, and negatively associated with temptation and urge to 
smoke. In the binge-eating sample, momentary perseverance was positively 
associated with difficulty in accessing food and restraint in eating, and 
negatively associated with urge to binge eat. While recent Laddr use was not 
associated directly with momentary self-regulation subscales, it did modify 
several of the contextual associations, including challenging contexts.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study provides preliminary evidence that momentary 
self-regulation may vary in response to differing momentary contexts in samples 
from two exemplar populations with risk behaviors. In addition, the Laddr 
application may modify some of these relationships. These findings demonstrate 
the possibility of measuring momentary self-regulation in a trans-diagnostic way 
and assessing the effects of momentary, mobile interventions in context. Health 
behavior change interventions may consider measuring and targeting momentary 
self-regulation in addition to trait-level self-regulation to better understand 
and improve health risk behaviors. This work will be used to inform a later 
stage of research focused on assessing the transdiagnostic mediating effect of 
momentary self-regulation on medical regimen adherence and health outcomes.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, Identifier: NCT03352713.

Copyright © 2022 Scherer, Metcalf, Whicker, Bartels, Grabinski, Kim, Sweeney, 
Lemley, Lavoie, Xie, Bissett, Dallery, Kiernan, Lowe, Onken, Prochaska, 
Stoeckel, Poldrack, MacKinnon and Marsch.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2022.798895
PMCID: PMC8971561
PMID: 35373179

Conflict of interest statement: JP has provided consultation to pharmaceutical 
and technology companies that make medications and other treatments for quitting 
smoking and has served as an expert witness in lawsuits against tobacco 
companies. In addition to her academic affiliation, LM is affiliated with 
Square2 Systems, Inc., the small business that developed the mobile Laddr 
intervention and has worked extensively with relevant institutions (including 
Dartmouth College and NIH) to manage any potential conflict of interest. All 
research data collection, data management, and statistical analyses are 
conducted by individuals with no affiliation with Square2 Systems. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


63. JMIR Form Res. 2022 May 31;6(5):e32740. doi: 10.2196/32740.

Pilot Testing in the Wild: Feasibility, Acceptability, Usage Patterns, and 
Efficacy of an Integrated Web and Smartphone Platform for Bipolar II Disorder.

Fletcher K(#)(1), Lindblom K(#)(1), Seabrook E(#)(1), Foley F(#)(1), Murray 
G(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mental Health, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Bipolar II disorder (BD-II) is associated with significant burden, 
disability, and mortality; however, there continues to be a dearth of 
evidence-based psychological interventions for this condition. 
Technology-mediated interventions incorporating self-management have untapped 
potential to help meet this need as an adjunct to usual clinical care.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this pilot study is to assess the feasibility, 
acceptability, and clinical utility of a novel intervention for BD-II (Tailored 
Recovery-oriented Intervention for Bipolar II Experiences; TRIBE), in which 
mindfulness-based psychological content is delivered via an integrated web and 
smartphone platform. The focus of the study is evaluation of the dynamic use 
patterns emerging from ecological momentary assessment and intervention to 
assist the real-world application of mindfulness skills learned from 
web-delivered modules.
METHODS: An open trial design using pretest and posttest assessments with nested 
qualitative evaluation was used. Individuals (aged 18-65 years) with a diagnosis 
of BD-II were recruited worldwide and invited to use a prototype of the TRIBE 
intervention over a 3-week period. Data were collected via web-based 
questionnaires and phone interviews at baseline and 3-week follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 25 participants completed baseline and follow-up 
assessments. Adherence rates (daily app use) were 65.6% across the 3-week study, 
with up to 88% (22/25) of participants using the app synergistically alongside 
the web-based program. Despite technical challenges with the prototype 
intervention (from user, hardware, and software standpoints), acceptability was 
adequate, and most participants rated the intervention positively in terms of 
concept (companion app with website: 19/25, 76%), content (19/25, 76%), and 
credibility and utility in supporting their management of bipolar disorder 
(17/25, 68%). Evaluation using behavioral archetypes identified important use 
pathways and a provisional model to inform platform refinement. As hypothesized, 
depression scores significantly decreased after the intervention 
(Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale baseline mean 8.60, SD 6.86, vs 
follow-up mean 6.16, SD 5.11; t24=2.63; P=.01; Cohen d=0.53, 95% CI 0.52-4.36).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that TRIBE is feasible and represents an 
appropriate and acceptable self-management program for patients with BD-II. 
Preliminary efficacy results are promising and support full development of TRIBE 
informed by the present behavioral archetype analysis. Modifications suggested 
by the pilot study include increasing the duration of the intervention and 
increasing technical support.

©Kathryn Fletcher, Katrina Lindblom, Elizabeth Seabrook, Fiona Foley, Greg 
Murray. Originally published in JMIR Formative Research 
(https://formative.jmir.org), 31.05.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/32740
PMCID: PMC9198820
PMID: 35639462

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


64. Child Neuropsychol. 2019 Nov;25(8):1022-1034. doi: 
10.1080/09297049.2018.1556624. Epub 2018 Dec 18.

The feasibility and acceptability of assessing inhibitory control and working 
memory among adolescents via an ecological momentary assessment approach.

Warren CM(1), Pentz MA(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Preventive Medicine, Division of Health Behavior Research, 
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine , Los Angeles , CA , 
USA.

Early adolescence is a critical period for the development of executive function 
(EF). EF deficits are associated with increased engagement in multiple health 
risk behaviors and may be influenced by momentary factors, such as state 
mindfulness and physical activity. Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) 
leverages the increasing ubiquity of smart-phones to assess moment-to-moment 
changes in neurocognition and behavior with minimal recall bias and high 
ecological validity. As such, EMA is a promising method for delivering 
performance-based EF tasks and assessing the degree to which EF is influenced by 
momentary variation in its putative antecedents (e.g. state mindfulness and PA). 
This study adapts the (1) State Mindfulness Attention Awareness Scale, (2) 
physical activity/sedentary behavior recall items, (3) complex symmetry span 
working memory task, and (4) the child flanker inhibitory control task into an 
EMA tool delivered via iPhone using Inquisit Web. This tool was piloted with a 
sample of 32 seventh graders over a 72 h period. Participants' posttest survey 
responses indicated that they found these study activities to be enjoyable, 
non-burdensome, not overly difficult, and preferable to pencil-and-paper 
instruments. Baseline correlations between flanker task performance and both 
BRIEF inhibitory control (σ = .23) and working memory subscales (σ = .34) were 
moderate. Correlations between symmetry span working memory task performance and 
BRIEF inhibitory control (σabsolute = .28; σpartial = .16) and working memory 
subscales (σabsolute = .19; σpartial = .15) were slightly lower, demonstrating 
associations consistent with previous studies. This study supports the 
feasibility and acceptability of administering two common performance-based EF 
tasks to adolescents via an EMA approach.

DOI: 10.1080/09297049.2018.1556624
PMCID: PMC6581642
PMID: 30558489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest to disclose.


65. JMIR Ment Health. 2024 May 24;11:e54412. doi: 10.2196/54412.

Examining the Effects of a Brief, Fully Self-Guided Mindfulness Ecological 
Momentary Intervention on Empathy and Theory-of-Mind for Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder: Randomized Controlled Trial.

Zainal NH(1)(2), Newman MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(2)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, United States.

BACKGROUND: The utility of brief mindfulness ecological momentary interventions 
(EMIs) to improve empathy and theory-of-mind has been underinvestigated, 
particularly in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).
OBJECTIVE: In this randomized controlled trial, we aimed to examine the efficacy 
of a 14-day, fully self-guided, mindfulness EMI on the empathy and 
theory-of-mind domains for GAD.
METHODS: Adults (aged ≥18 y) diagnosed with GAD were randomized to a mindfulness 
EMI (68/110, 61.8%) or self-monitoring app (42/110, 38.2%) arm. They completed 
the Interpersonal Reactivity Index self-report empathy measure and 
theory-of-mind test (Bell-Lysaker Emotion Recognition Task) at prerandomization, 
postintervention, and 1-month follow-up (1MFU) time points. Hierarchical linear 
modeling was conducted with the intent-to-treat principle to determine 
prerandomization to postintervention (pre-post intervention) and 
prerandomization to 1MFU (pre-1MFU) changes, comparing the mindfulness EMI to 
self-monitoring.
RESULTS: Observed effects were generally stronger from pre-1MFU than from 
pre-post intervention time points. From pre-post intervention time points, the 
mindfulness EMI was more efficacious than the self-monitoring app on fantasy 
(the ability to imagine being in others' shoes; between-intervention effect 
size: Cohen d=0.26, P=.007; within-intervention effect size: Cohen d=0.22, P=.02 
for the mindfulness EMI and Cohen d=-0.16, P=.10 for the self-monitoring app). 
From pre-1MFU time points, the mindfulness EMI, but not the self-monitoring app, 
improved theory-of-mind (a window into others' thoughts and intentions through 
abstract, propositional knowledge about their mental states, encompassing the 
ability to decipher social cues) and the fantasy, personal distress (stress when 
witnessing others' negative experiences), and perspective-taking (understanding 
others' perspective) empathy domains. The effect sizes were small to moderate 
(Cohen d=0.15-0.36; P<.001 to P=.01) for significant between-intervention 
effects from pre-1MFU time points. Furthermore, the within-intervention effect 
sizes for these significant outcomes were stronger for the mindfulness EMI 
(Cohen d=0.30-0.43; P<.001 to P=.03) than the self-monitoring app (Cohen d=-0.12 
to 0.21; P=.001 to P>.99) from pre-1MFU time points. No between-intervention and 
within-intervention effects on empathic concern (feeling affection, compassion, 
and care when observing others in distress, primarily attending to their 
emotional well-being) were observed from pre-post intervention and pre-1MFU time 
points.
CONCLUSIONS: The brief mindfulness EMI improved specific domains of empathy (eg, 
fantasy, personal distress, and perspective-taking) and theory-of-mind with 
small to moderate effect sizes in persons with GAD. Higher-intensity, 
self-guided or coach-facilitated, multicomponent mindfulness EMIs targeting the 
optimization of social relationships are likely necessary to improve the 
empathic concern domain in this population.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04846777; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04846777.

©Nur Hani Zainal, Michelle G Newman. Originally published in JMIR Mental Health 
(https://mental.jmir.org), 24.05.2024.

DOI: 10.2196/54412
PMCID: PMC11161716
PMID: 38787613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


66. JMIR Res Protoc. 2019 Feb 20;8(2):e11002. doi: 10.2196/11002.

Examining the Effects of Mindful Eating Training on Adherence to a 
Carbohydrate-Restricted Diet in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes (the DELISH 
Study): Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial.

Mason AE(#)(1)(2), Saslow L(#)(3), Moran PJ(1), Kim S(4), Wali PK(1), 
Abousleiman H(1), Hartman A(1), Richler R(1), Schleicher S(5), Hartogensis W(1), 
Epel ES(1)(2), Hecht F(1).

Author information:
(1)UCSF Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(2)Center for Health and Community, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(3)School of Nursing, Department of Health Behavior and Biological Sciences, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    JMIR Res Protoc. 2020 Jan 13;9(1):e17226. doi: 10.2196/17226.

BACKGROUND: Diet patterns have a profound influence on glycemic control for 
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and craving-related eating is 
an important obstacle to dietary adherence. A growing body of research suggests 
that carbohydrate-restricted (CR) diets can improve glycemic control and reduce 
medication dependence in T2DM. However, limited data speak to the effects of 
long-term adherence to CR diets. Mindful eating training has been shown to 
reduce craving-related eating in overweight populations but has yet to be 
examined as a behavioral support for dietary adherence in T2DM. This trial 
examines behavioral mechanisms, particularly craving-related eating, through 
which mindful eating training might improve adherence to CR dietary 
recommendations in T2DM. This will clarify the importance of focusing on 
craving-related eating in the optimization of dietary adherence interventions.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this trial is to determine whether providing training in 
mindful eating increases adherence to a CR dietary recommendation in T2DM.
METHODS: We are randomizing 60 participants to receive a CR diet with or without 
mindful eating training (12-week group intervention) and are following 
participants for 12 weeks after intervention completion. We hypothesize that 
participants who receive mindful eating training (relative to those who do not) 
will demonstrate greater adherence to the CR diet.
RESULTS: Our primary outcome is change in craving-related eating, as assessed 
using an ecological momentary assessment mobile phone-based platform. Secondary 
behavioral pathway outcomes include changes in stress-related eating, 
impulsivity, glycemic control, weight change, dietary adherence, and resumption 
of dietary adherence after dietary nonadherence.
CONCLUSIONS: This theory-driven trial will shed light on the impact of 
mindfulness training on mechanisms that may impact dietary adherence in T2DM.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03207711; 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03207711 (Archived by WebCite 
at http://www.webcitation.org/73pXscwaU).
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/11002.

©Ashley E Mason, Laura Saslow, Patricia J Moran, Sarah Kim, Hiba Abousleiman, 
Alison Hartman, Robert Richler, Samantha Schleicher, Wendy Hartogensis, Elissa S 
Epel, Frederick Hecht. Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols 
(http://www.researchprotocols.org), 20.02.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/11002
PMCID: PMC6401674
PMID: 30545813

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: FH is a scientific 
advisor to Virta Health. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.


67. Mindfulness (N Y). 2016;7(5):1114-1122. doi: 10.1007/s12671-016-0550-8. Epub 
2016 Jun 2.

Mindfulness and mood stimulate each other in an upward spiral: a mindful walking 
intervention using experience sampling.

Gotink RA(1), Hermans KS(2), Geschwind N(2), De Nooij R(3), De Groot WT(3), 
Speckens AE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Psychology Science, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
(3)Institute for Science, Innovation and Society, Radboud University Nijmegen, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(4)Radboudumc Center for Mindfulness, Department of Psychiatry, Radboud UMC 
Nijmegen, 6500 HB Nijmegen, Netherlands.

The aim of this study was to explore the feasibility and effectiveness of 
mindful walking in nature as a possible means to maintain mindfulness skills 
after a mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) or mindfulness-based stress 
reduction (MBSR) course. Mindful walking alongside the river Rhine took place 
for 1, 3, 6, or 10 days, with a control period of a similar number of days, 
1 week before the mindful walking period. In 29 mindfulness participants, 
experience sampling method (ESM) was performed during the control and mindful 
walking period. Smartphones offered items on positive and negative affect and 
state mindfulness at random times during the day. Furthermore, self-report 
questionnaires were administered before and after the control and mindful 
walking period, assessing depression, anxiety, stress, brooding, and mindfulness 
skills. ESM data showed that walking resulted in a significant improvement of 
both mindfulness and positive affect, and that state mindfulness and positive 
affect prospectively enhanced each other in an upward spiral. The opposite 
pattern was observed with state mindfulness and negative affect, where increased 
state mindfulness predicted less negative affect. Exploratory questionnaire data 
indicated corresponding results, though non-significant due to the small sample 
size. This is the first time that ESM was used to assess interactions between 
state mindfulness and momentary affect during a mindfulness intervention of 
several consecutive days, showing an upward spiral effect. Mindful walking in 
nature may be an effective way to maintain mindfulness practice and further 
improve psychological functioning.

DOI: 10.1007/s12671-016-0550-8
PMCID: PMC5010615
PMID: 27642373

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


68. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2024 Apr 29;21(5):570. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph21050570.

Reducing Loneliness through the Power of Practicing Together: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Online Dyadic Socio-Emotional vs. Mindfulness-Based 
Training.

Matthaeus H(1)(2), Godara M(1)(3), Silveira S(1), Hecht M(4), Voelkle M(2), 
Singer T(1).

Author information:
(1)Social Neuroscience Lab, Max Planck Society, 10557 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 12489 Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Psychology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Helmut Schmidt University, 22043 
Hamburg, Germany.

Loneliness has become a pressing topic, especially among young adults and during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. In a randomized controlled trial with 253 healthy adults, 
we evaluated the differential efficacy of two 10-week app-delivered mental 
training programs: one based on classic mindfulness and one on an innovative 
partner-based socio-emotional practice (Affect Dyad). We show that the 
partner-based training resulted in greater reductions in loneliness than the 
mindfulness-based training. This effect was shown on three measures of 
loneliness: general loneliness assessed with the 20-item UCLA Loneliness Scale, 
state loneliness queried over an 8-day ecological momentary assessment in 
participants' daily lives, and loneliness ratings required before and after 
daily practice. Our study provides evidence for the higher efficacy of a mental 
training approach based on a 12 min practice conducted with a partner in 
reducing loneliness and provides a novel, scalable online approach to reduce the 
increasing problem of loneliness in society.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph21050570
PMCID: PMC11121251
PMID: 38791785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.S. was honorary co-founder, scientific and 
curriculum advisor for Humanize from 2021 to summer 2023. Humanize is a start-up 
that is inspired by T.S.’s mental intervention research as well as her ReConnect 
Masterclasses and courses focusing on dyadic interventions, including the Affect 
Dyad, and is releasing modified and extended versions of these dyad intervention 
programs on a commercial digital platform and app. These additional offices of 
T.S. have all been formally approved by the Max Planck Society. At the present 
moment, T.S. no longer has any active role nor any shares in Humanize.


69. JMIR Form Res. 2021 Nov 17;5(11):e30991. doi: 10.2196/30991.

A Technology-Based Pregnancy Health and Wellness Intervention (Two Happy 
Hearts): Case Study.

Jimah T(1), Borg H(1), Kehoe P(1), Pimentel P(1), Turner A(2), Labbaf S(3), 
Asgari Mehrabadi M(4), Rahmani AM(1)(3)(5), Dutt N(3)(4), Guo Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, 
CA, United States.
(2)First 5 Orange County Children & Families Commission, Santa Ana, CA, United 
States.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
United States.
(4)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.
(5)Institute for Future Health, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: The physical and emotional well-being of women is critical for 
healthy pregnancy and birth outcomes. The Two Happy Hearts intervention is a 
personalized mind-body program coached by community health workers that includes 
monitoring and reflecting on personal health, as well as practicing stress 
management strategies such as mindful breathing and movement.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study are to (1) test the daily use of a wearable 
device to objectively measure physical and emotional well-being along with 
subjective assessments during pregnancy, and (2) explore the user's engagement 
with the Two Happy Hearts intervention prototype, as well as understand their 
experiences with various intervention components.
METHODS: A case study with a mixed design was used. We recruited a 29-year-old 
woman at 33 weeks of gestation with a singleton pregnancy. She had no medical 
complications or physical restrictions, and she was enrolled in the Medi-Cal 
public health insurance plan. The participant engaged in the Two Happy Hearts 
intervention prototype from her third trimester until delivery. The Oura smart 
ring was used to continuously monitor objective physical and emotional states, 
such as resting heart rate, resting heart rate variability, sleep, and physical 
activity. In addition, the participant self-reported her physical and emotional 
health using the Two Happy Hearts mobile app-based 24-hour recall surveys (sleep 
quality and level of physical activity) and ecological momentary assessment 
(positive and negative emotions), as well as the Perceived Stress Scale, Center 
for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. 
Engagement with the Two Happy Hearts intervention was recorded via both the 
smart ring and phone app, and user experiences were collected via Research 
Electronic Data Capture satisfaction surveys. Objective data from the Oura ring 
and subjective data on physical and emotional health were described. Regression 
plots and Pearson correlations between the objective and subjective data were 
presented, and content analysis was performed for the qualitative data.
RESULTS: Decreased resting heart rate was significantly correlated with 
increased heart rate variability (r=-0.92, P<.001). We found significant 
associations between self-reported responses and Oura ring measures: (1) 
positive emotions and heart rate variability (r=0.54, P<.001), (2) sleep quality 
and sleep score (r=0.52, P<.001), and (3) physical activity and step count 
(r=0.77, P<.001). In addition, deep sleep appeared to increase as light and 
rapid eye movement sleep decreased. The psychological measures of stress, 
depression, and anxiety appeared to decrease from baseline to post intervention. 
Furthermore, the participant had a high completion rate of the components of the 
Two Happy Hearts intervention prototype and shared several positive experiences, 
such as an increased self-efficacy and a normal delivery.
CONCLUSIONS: The Two Happy Hearts intervention prototype shows promise for 
potential use by underserved pregnant women.

©Tamara Jimah, Holly Borg, Priscilla Kehoe, Pamela Pimentel, Arlene Turner, Sina 
Labbaf, Milad Asgari Mehrabadi, Amir M. Rahmani, Nikil Dutt, Yuqing Guo. 
Originally published in JMIR Formative Research (https://formative.jmir.org), 
17.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/30991
PMCID: PMC8663690
PMID: 34787576

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


70. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2022 Feb 18;10(2):e30211. doi: 10.2196/30211.

Validity and Feasibility of the Monitoring and Modeling Family Eating Dynamics 
System to Automatically Detect In-field Family Eating Behavior: Observational 
Study.

Bell BM(1)(2), Alam R(3)(4), Mondol AS(5), Ma M(5)(6), Emi IA(5), Preum 
SM(5)(7), de la Haye K(2), Stankovic JA(5), Lach J(4)(8), Spruijt-Metz 
D(2)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT, United States.
(2)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, School of Engineering and 
Applied Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(5)Department of Computer Science, School of Engineering and Applied Science, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(6)Department of Computer Science, School of Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, United States.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United 
States.
(8)School of Engineering and Applied Science, The George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, United States.
(9)Center for Economic and Social Research, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, 
and Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(10)Department of Psychology, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: The field of dietary assessment has a long history, marked by both 
controversies and advances. Emerging technologies may be a potential solution to 
address the limitations of self-report dietary assessment methods. The 
Monitoring and Modeling Family Eating Dynamics (M2FED) study uses wrist-worn 
smartwatches to automatically detect real-time eating activity in the field. The 
ecological momentary assessment (EMA) methodology was also used to confirm 
whether eating occurred (ie, ground truth) and to measure other contextual 
information, including positive and negative affect, hunger, satiety, mindful 
eating, and social context.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to report on participant compliance (feasibility) to 
the 2 distinct EMA protocols of the M2FED study (hourly time-triggered and 
eating event-triggered assessments) and on the performance (validity) of the 
smartwatch algorithm in automatically detecting eating events in a family-based 
study.
METHODS: In all, 20 families (58 participants) participated in the 2-week, 
observational, M2FED study. All participants wore a smartwatch on their dominant 
hand and responded to time-triggered and eating event-triggered mobile 
questionnaires via EMA while at home. Compliance to EMA was calculated overall, 
for hourly time-triggered mobile questionnaires, and for eating event-triggered 
mobile questionnaires. The predictors of compliance were determined using a 
logistic regression model. The number of true and false positive eating events 
was calculated, as well as the precision of the smartwatch algorithm. The 
Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis test, and Spearman rank correlation were 
used to determine whether there were differences in the detection of eating 
events by participant age, gender, family role, and height.
RESULTS: The overall compliance rate across the 20 deployments was 89.26% 
(3723/4171) for all EMAs, 89.7% (3328/3710) for time-triggered EMAs, and 85.7% 
(395/461) for eating event-triggered EMAs. Time of day (afternoon odds ratio 
[OR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.42-0.85; evening OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.38-0.74) and whether 
other family members had also answered an EMA (OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.66-2.58) were 
significant predictors of compliance to time-triggered EMAs. Weekend status (OR 
2.40, 95% CI 1.25-4.91) and deployment day (OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.86-0.97) were 
significant predictors of compliance to eating event-triggered EMAs. 
Participants confirmed that 76.5% (302/395) of the detected events were true 
eating events (ie, true positives), and the precision was 0.77. The proportion 
of correctly detected eating events did not significantly differ by participant 
age, gender, family role, or height (P>.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that EMA is a feasible tool to collect 
ground-truth eating activity and thus evaluate the performance of wearable 
sensors in the field. The combination of a wrist-worn smartwatch to 
automatically detect eating and a mobile device to capture ground-truth eating 
activity offers key advantages for the user and makes mobile health technologies 
more accessible to nonengineering behavioral researchers.

©Brooke Marie Bell, Ridwan Alam, Abu Sayeed Mondol, Meiyi Ma, Ifat Afrin Emi, 
Sarah Masud Preum, Kayla de la Haye, John A Stankovic, John Lach, Donna 
Spruijt-Metz. Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth 
(https://mhealth.jmir.org), 18.02.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/30211
PMCID: PMC8900902
PMID: 35179508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


71. Mindfulness (N Y). 2023;14(3):622-636. doi: 10.1007/s12671-022-02050-y. Epub 
2023 Jan 7.

Be Kind to Yourself: the Implications of Momentary Self-Compassion for Affective 
Dynamics and Well-Being in Daily Life.

Mey LK(1), Wenzel M(2), Morello K(1), Rowland Z(2), Kubiak T(2), Tüscher 
O(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute for Resilience Research, Wallstr. 7, 55122 Mainz, Germany.
(2)Health Psychology, Institute for Psychology, Johannes Gutenberg University, 
Binger Str. 14-16, 55122 Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center of the 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Untere Zahlbacher Strasse 8, 55131 Mainz, 
Germany.

OBJECTIVES: While self-compassion (SC) has mostly been understood as a stable 
trait-like property, growing evidence suggests that it may fluctuate over time 
within a given individual. However, little is known on how these fluctuations 
relate to affective well-being and affective dynamics, such as emotional inertia 
and stress reactivity in daily life.
METHODS: A sample of 119 non-clinical individuals (mean age: 31.3 years, 53.8% 
female) completed a 7-day smartphone-based ecological momentary assessment study 
with six semi-random signals per day. With each signal, individuals reported 
their momentary positive affect (PA) and negative affect (NA), recent SC, and 
occurrence and perceived strain of daily hassles since the last signal.
RESULTS: Whenever individuals reported higher recent SC than usual, they 
experienced higher momentary PA and lower momentary NA. Moreover, higher recent 
SC related to lower stress reactivity in terms of lower decrease of PA and lower 
increase of NA following the experience of daily hassles. No associations 
between SC and emotional inertia were found. When distinguishing between the 
positive components (SC-Pos) and negative components (SC-Neg) of SC, SC-Neg 
(compared to SC-Pos) was more strongly connected to NA, while SC-Pos and SC-Neg 
were similarly connected to PA. SC-Pos was associated with an attenuated NA 
stress reactivity, and SC-Neg with an increased NA stress reactivity. SC-Pos and 
SC-Neg did not significantly moderate PA stress reactivity nor emotional 
inertia.
CONCLUSIONS: Results show that the benefits of SC for well-being and stress 
reactivity may unfold whenever we treat ourselves with compassion, irrespective 
of how self-compassionate we are in general.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s12671-022-02050-y.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1007/s12671-022-02050-y
PMCID: PMC9823261
PMID: 36644400

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare no 
competing interests.


72. J Oral Rehabil. 2025 Jun;52(6):859-870. doi: 10.1111/joor.13943. Epub 2025 Jan 
24.

Higher Levels of Dispositional Mindfulness Are Associated With More Effective 
Ecological Momentary Intervention Outcomes in Reducing the Frequency of Awake 
Bruxism Behaviours.

Prado-E-Silva L(1), de Oliveira Melchior M(2)(3), Mélo AM(2), Stuginski-Barbosa 
J(4), Mazzi-Chaves JF(2), Díaz-Serrano KV(5), da Silva Gherardi-Donato EC(3), 
Leite-Panissi CRA(6), Magri LV(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Curso de Odontologia, Universidade de Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Odontologia Restauradora, Faculdade de Odontologia de 
Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Enfermagem Psiquiátrica, Escola de Enfermagem de Ribeirão 
Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, PAHO/WHO Collaborating Centre for Nursing 
Research Development, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Bauru Orofacial Pain Group, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Clínica Infantil, Faculdade de Odontologia de Ribeirão Preto, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Psicologia, Faculdade de Filosofia Ciências e Letras de 
Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Previous research has highlighted the multifactorial nature of awake 
bruxism (AB), including its associations with stress, anxiety and other 
psychological factors. Dispositional mindfulness, known for its benefits in 
enhancing emotional regulation and reducing stress, has not yet been thoroughly 
investigated in association with AB.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate whether levels of dispositional 
mindfulness predict the efficacy of ecological momentary intervention (EMI) in 
reducing the frequency of AB behaviours.
METHODS: This study employed a quasi-experimental design with a correlational 
component and involved 83 undergraduate dental students categorised into high 
and low mindfulness groups based on the Mindfulness Attention and Awareness 
Scale (MAAS). An EMI was implemented using the No Clenching mobile app, which 
sent 12 alerts per day over 1 month. The primary outcome measure was a 50% 
reduction in the frequency of AB behaviours.
RESULTS: A significant positive relationship was found between dispositional 
mindfulness levels and the reduction in AB behaviours. Participants with higher 
mindfulness levels experienced a greater reduction in AB frequency compared to 
those with lower mindfulness levels. Mixed-effects regression analysis revealed 
that mindfulness levels were a significant predictor of bruxism reduction 
(β = 0.45, p < 0.01). The coefficient for MAAS was positive and significant 
(coefficient = 1.5305, p < 0.001), indicating that higher mindfulness levels are 
associated with greater reductions in AB frequency. Additionally, a 
significantly higher percentage of participants in the high mindfulness group 
(97.5%) achieved a 50% reduction in AB behaviours compared to the low 
mindfulness group (62%).
CONCLUSION: Higher levels of dispositional mindfulness are associated with more 
effective EMI outcomes in reducing AB behaviours. Incorporating 
mindfulness-based approaches into intervention strategies for AB could lead to 
more personalised and effective treatments.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/joor.13943
PMID: 39861974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mindfulness (N Y). 2021;12(12):2997-3010. doi: 10.1007/s12671-021-01760-z. Epub 
2021 Sep 24.

Negative Mood and Food Craving Strength Among Women with Overweight: 
Implications for Targeting Mechanisms Using a Mindful Eating Intervention.

Sagui-Henson SJ(#)(1), Radin RM(#)(1)(2), Jhaveri K(1)(3), Brewer JA(4), Cohn 
M(5), Hartogensis W(1), Mason AE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California San Francisco 
(UCSF), 1545 Divisadero Street, 3rd Floor, Ste 301, San Francisco, CA 94115 USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, UCSF, San Francisco, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(4)Brown University School of Public Health and Medical School, Providence, USA.
(5)Google Inc, Mountain View, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: When experiencing negative mood, people often eat to improve their 
mood. A learned association between mood and eating may cultivate frequent food 
cravings, detracting from health goals. Training in mindful eating may target 
this cycle of emotion-craving-eating by teaching individuals to manage urges 
when experiencing negative mood. We examined the impact of a mobile mindful 
eating intervention on the link between negative mood and food cravings among 
overweight women.
METHODS: In a single-arm trial, participants (n = 64, M age = 46.1 years, M 
BMI = 31.5 kg/m2) completed ecological momentary assessments of negative mood 
and food cravings 3 times/day for 3 days pre- and post-intervention, as well as 
1-month post-intervention. Using multilevel linear regression, we compared 
associations between negative mood and food craving strength at pre- vs. 
post-intervention (model 1) and post-intervention vs. 1-month follow-up (model 
2).
RESULTS: In model 1, negative mood interacted with time point (β =  - .20, 
SE = .09, p = .02, 95% CI [- .38, - .03]) to predict craving strength, 
indicating that the within-person association between negative mood and craving 
strength was significantly weaker at post-intervention (β = 0.18) relative to 
pre-intervention (β = 0.38). In model 2, negative mood did not interact with 
time point to predict craving strength (β = .13, SE = .09, p = .10, 95% 
CI - .03, .31]); the association did not significantly differ between 
post-intervention and 1-month follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Training in mindful eating weakened the mood-craving association 
from pre- to post-intervention. The weakened association remained at follow-up. 
Our findings highlight the mood-craving link as a target-worthy mechanism of 
mindful eating that should be assessed in clinical trials.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02694731.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s12671-021-01760-z.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12671-021-01760-z
PMCID: PMC8460847
PMID: 34584574

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestAuthor Brewer owns stock in 
and serves as a paid consultant for Sharecare Inc., the company that owns the 
mindfulness app used in this study. Authort Brewer’s financial interest has been 
disclosed to and is being managed by Brown University, in accordance with its 
Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment policies. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.


74. BMJ Open. 2019 Feb 19;9(2):e024104. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024104.

HORYZONS trial: protocol for a randomised controlled trial of a moderated online 
social therapy to maintain treatment effects from first-episode psychosis 
services.

Alvarez-Jimenez M(1)(2), Bendall S(1)(2), Koval P(3), Rice S(1)(2), Cagliarini 
D(1)(2), Valentine L(1)(2), D'Alfonso S(1)(4), Miles C(1)(2), Russon P(1)(2), 
Penn DL(5)(6), Phillips J(1)(2), Lederman R(4), Wadley G(4), Killackey E(1)(2), 
Santesteban-Echarri O(7), Mihalopoulos C(8), Herrman H(1)(2), Gonzalez-Blanch 
C(9), Gilbertson T(1)(2), Lal S(10)(11)(12), Chambers R(13), Daglas-Georgiou 
R(1)(2), Latorre C(14), Cotton SM(1)(2), McGorry PD(1)(2), Gleeson JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(5)School of Behavioural and Health Sciences, Australian Catholic University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, NC, 
United Stated.
(7)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Department of Psychiatry, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(8)School of Health and Social Development, Deakin University, Geelong, 
Victoria, Australia.
(9)University Hospital Marques de Valdecilla-IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
(10)School of Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(11)University of Montreal Hospital Research Center, Health Innovation and 
Evaluation Hub, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(12)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(13)Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(14)University Hospital 'Virgen del Rocio', Seville, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Specialised early intervention services have demonstrated improved 
outcomes in first-episode psychosis (FEP); however, clinical gains may not be 
sustained after patients are transferred to regular care. Moreover, many 
patients with FEP remain socially isolated with poor functional outcomes. To 
address this, our multidisciplinary team has developed a moderated online social 
media therapy (HORYZONS) designed to enhance social functioning and maintain 
clinical gains from specialist FEP services. HORYZONS merges: (1) peer-to-peer 
social networking; (2) tailored therapeutic interventions; (3) expert and 
peer-moderation; and (4) new models of psychological therapy (strengths and 
mindfulness-based interventions) targeting social functioning. The aim of this 
trial is to determine whether following 2 years of specialised support and 
18-month online social media-based intervention (HORYZONS) is superior to 18 
months of regular care.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This study is a single-blind randomised controlled trial. 
The treatment conditions include HORYZONS plus treatment as usual (TAU) or TAU 
alone. We recruited 170 young people with FEP, aged 16-27 years, in clinical 
remission and nearing discharge from Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention 
Centre, Melbourne. The study includes four assessment time points, namely, 
baseline, 6-month, 12-month and 18-month follow-up. The study is due for 
completion in July 2018 and included a 40-month recruitment period and an 
18-month treatment phase. The primary outcome is social functioning at 18 
months. Secondary outcome measures include rate of hospital admissions, 
cost-effectiveness, vocational status, depression, social support, loneliness, 
self-esteem, self-efficacy, anxiety, psychological well-being, satisfaction with 
life, quality of life, positive and negative psychotic symptoms and substance 
use. Social functioning will be also assessed in real time through our 
Smartphone Ecological Momentary Assessment tool.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Melbourne Health Human Research Ethics Committee 
(2013.146) provided ethics approval for this study. Findings will be made 
available through scientific journals and forums and to the public via social 
media and the Orygen website.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ACTRN12614000009617; Pre-results.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024104
PMCID: PMC6368148
PMID: 30782893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


75. J Adv Nurs. 2021 May;77(5):2519-2529. doi: 10.1111/jan.14714. Epub 2021 Feb 11.

Smarthealth technology study protocol to improve relationships between older 
adults with dementia and family caregivers.

Rose KM(1), Coop Gordon K(2), Schlegel EC(1), Mccall M(2), Gao Y(3), Ma M(3), 
Lenger KA(2), Ko E(1), Wright KD(1)(4), Wang H(3), Stankovic J(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
USA.
(3)School of Engineering and Applied Science, Computer Science, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(4)Discovery Themes-Prevention and Treatment of Chronic Brain Injury Institute, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

AIM: The aim of this study is to develop a Smarthealth system of monitoring, 
modelling, and interactive recommendation solutions (for caregivers) for in-home 
dementia patient care that focuses on caregiver-patient relationships.
DESIGN: This descriptive study employs a single-group, non-randomized trial to 
examine functionality, effectiveness, feasibility, and acceptability of the 
novel Smarthealth system.
METHODS: Thirty persons with Alzheimer's Disease or related dementia and their 
family caregivers (N = 30 dyads) will receive and install Smarthealth technology 
in their home. There will be a 1-month observation phase for collecting baseline 
mood states and a 2-month implementation phase when caregivers will receive 
stress management techniques for each detected, negative mood state. Caregivers 
will report technique implementation and usefulness, sent via Ecological 
Momentary Assessment system to the study-provided smartphone. Caregivers will 
provide daily, self-reported mood and health ratings. Instruments measuring 
caregiver assessment of disruptive behaviours and their effect on caregivers; 
caregiver depressive symptoms, anxiety and stress; caregiver strain; and family 
functioning will be completed at baseline and 3 months. The study received 
funding in 2018 and ethics board approval in 2019.
DISCUSSION: This study will develop and test novel in-home technology to improve 
family caregiving relationships. Results from this study will help develop and 
improve the Smarthealth recommendation system and determine its usefulness, 
feasibility, and acceptability for persons with dementia and their family 
caregiver.
IMPACT: The Smarthealth technology discussed will provide in-home stress 
reduction resources at a time when older adults may be experiencing increasingly 
high rates of isolation and anxiety and caregiver dyads may be experiencing high 
levels of relationship strain.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered with Clinical Trials.gov 
(Identifier NCT04536701).

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14714
PMID: 33576064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. JMIR Ment Health. 2025 Feb 4;12:e57201. doi: 10.2196/57201.

Evaluating the Effectiveness of InsightApp for Anxiety, Valued Action, and 
Psychological Resilience: Longitudinal Randomized Controlled Trial.

Amo V(1), Lieder F(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Anxiety disorders are among the most prevalent mental disorders, and 
stress plays a significant role in their development. Ecological momentary 
interventions (EMIs) hold great potential to help people manage stress and 
anxiety by training emotion regulation and coping skills in real-life settings. 
InsightApp is a gamified EMI and research tool that incorporates elements from 
evidence-based therapeutic approaches. It is designed to strengthen people's 
metacognitive skills for coping with challenging real-life situations and 
embracing anxiety and other emotions.
OBJECTIVE: This randomized controlled trial aims to examine the effectiveness of 
InsightApp in (1) improving individuals' metacognitive strategies for coping 
with stress and anxiety and (2) promoting value-congruent action. It also 
evaluates how long these effects are retained. This experiment advances our 
understanding of the role of metacognition in emotional and behavioral 
reactivity to stress.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized controlled trial with 228 participants 
(completion rate: n=197, 86.4%; mean age 38, SD 11.50 years; age range 20-80 
years; female: n=101, 52.6%; and White: n=175, 91.1%), who were randomly 
assigned to either the treatment or the active placebo control group. During the 
1-week intervention phase, the treatment group engaged with InsightApp, while 
participants in the control group interacted with a placebo version of the app 
that delivered executive function training. We assessed the differences between 
the 2 groups in posttest and follow-up assessments of mental health and 
well-being while controlling for preexisting differences. Moreover, we used a 
multilevel model to analyze the longitudinal data, focusing on the 
within-participant causal effects of the intervention on emotional and 
behavioral reactivity to daily stressors. Specifically, we measured daily 
anxiety, struggle with anxiety, and value-congruent action.
RESULTS: The intervention delivered by InsightApp yielded mixed results. On one 
hand, we found no significant posttest scores on mental health and well-being 
measures directly after the intervention or 7 days later (all P>.22). In 
contrast, when confronted with real-life stress, the treatment group experienced 
a 15% lower increase in anxiety (1-tailed t test, t197=-2.4; P=.009) and a 12% 
lower increase in the struggle with anxiety (t197=-1.87; P=.031) than the 
control group. Furthermore, individuals in the treatment group demonstrated a 7% 
higher tendency to align their actions with their values compared to the control 
group (t197=3.23; P=.002). After the intervention period, InsightApp's positive 
effects on the struggle with anxiety in reaction to stress were sustained, and 
increased to an 18% lower reactivity to stress (t197=-2.84; P=.002).
CONCLUSIONS: As our study yielded mixed results, further studies are needed to 
obtain an accurate and reliable understanding of the effectiveness of 
InsightApp. Overall, our findings tentatively suggest that guiding people to 
apply adaptive metacognitive strategies for coping with real-life stress daily 
with a gamified EMI is a promising approach that deserves further evaluation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: OSF Registries osf.io/k3b5d; https://osf.io/k3b5d.

©Victoria Amo, Falk Lieder. Originally published in JMIR Mental Health 
(https://mental.jmir.org), 04.02.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/57201
PMCID: PMC11836588
PMID: 39904504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.